Back to List of Chapters
Chapter 2-0805, Causal Relationship
Paragraph and Subject
Date
Trans. No.
Table of Contents
01/13
13-05
1. Purpose and Scope
01/13
13-05
2. Types of Causal Relationship
01/13
13-05
3. Evidence Needed
05/23
23-04
4. Evaluating Medical Opinions
01/13
13-05
5. Obtaining Additional Medical Opinion
01/13
13-05
6. High-Risk Employment
01/13
13-05
7. Consequential and Intervening Injuries
01/13
13-05
Back to Chapter 2-0805 Table of Contents
1. Purpose and Scope. This chapter contains guidelines for determining the question of causal relationship as it relates to both traumatic injury and occupational illness claims. It discusses causal relationship as one of the five basic components for acceptance of an initial claim and also discusses the information necessary to establish causal relationship for claimed consequential conditions later in the life of a case.
The CE should refer to the FECA PM Chapter 2-0800 (Initial Development of Claims) for specific information regarding how to properly develop claims.
Back to Chapter 2-0805 Table of Contents
2. Types of Causal Relationship. An injury or disease may be related to employment factors in any of four ways, as follows:
a. Direct Causation. This type of relationship is demonstrated when the injury or factors of employment, through a natural and unbroken sequence, result in the condition claimed. A fractured arm sustained in a fall would be considered a direct result of the fall, and a sensorineural hearing loss might likewise be caused directly by occupational noise exposure over a period of time.
In occupational disease claims, however, the medical evidence needed to support the relationship will likely require greater rationale than in traumatic injury claims. The phrase "proximately caused" is also used to designate this kind of relationship.
b. Aggravation. This kind of relationship occurs if a pre-existing condition is worsened, either temporarily or permanently, by an injury arising in the course of employment. For instance, a traumatic back injury may aggravate a claimant's pre-existing degenerative disc disease, and compensation would be payable for the duration of the aggravation as medically determined. An aggravation must be diagnosed by a physician to be compensable.
A claim may be accepted for a lesser established diagnosis if the aggravation issue requires further development. For example, if a physician diagnoses degenerative arthritis of the right knee and a right knee strain as causally related to a traumatic injury, but does not address aggravation, the CE may accept the right knee strain and concurrently develop the claim to determine whether the arthritis was aggravated by the injury.
If the medical evidence establishes an aggravation of a condition as causally related to a work injury, but the evidence is unclear as to whether the aggravation is temporary or permanent, the case may be accepted for a temporary aggravation and concurrently developed to determine the nature and extent of the aggravation.
(1) Temporary aggravation involves a limited period of medical treatment and/or disability, after which the employee returns to his or her previous physical status (i.e. baseline). Compensation is payable only for the period of aggravation established by the weight of the medical evidence, and not for any disability caused by the underlying disease. This is true even if the claimant cannot return to the job held at time of injury because the pre-existing condition will worsen if he or she does so (see James L. Hearn, 29 ECAB 278).
If the medical evidence establishes that a temporary aggravation has ceased at the time of acceptance, the acceptance letter should note the end date of the accepted temporary aggravation. The specific dates of the temporary aggravation or the date the temporary aggravation ceased should also be included in any Statement of Accepted Facts (SOAF) that is prepared.
(2) Permanent aggravation occurs when a condition will persist indefinitely due to the effects of the work-related injury or when a condition is materially worsened such that it will not revert to its previous level of severity. For instance, an allergy in a severely asthmatic employee which would have persisted in any event may be permanently aggravated by exposure to construction dust and fumes in the workplace such that subsequent episodes are more severe than they otherwise would have been.
A case should be accepted for permanent aggravation only after careful evaluation of all medical evidence of record. The CE should usually refer the claimant for a second opinion examination (depending upon the complexity of the claimed condition and the medical rationale in the file) before accepting the claim for a permanent aggravation.
c. Acceleration. A work-related injury or condition may hasten the development of an underlying condition, and acceleration is said to occur when the ordinary course of the disease does not account for the speed with which a condition develops. For example, a claimant's knee arthritis may have been accelerated by activities such as continuous walking, stooping and squatting in his/her job over a 15 year career that involved these activities for a majority of each day. An acceptance for acceleration of a condition carries the same force as an acceptance for direct causation. That is, the condition has been accepted with no set limitation on its duration or severity.
d. Precipitation. A latent condition which would not have become manifest but for the employment is said to have been precipitated by factors of the employment. For instance, tuberculosis may be latent for a number of years, and then become manifest due to renewed exposure in the workplace. The claim would be accepted for precipitation, but the acceptance would be limited to the period of work-related tuberculosis and OWCP's responsibility for the condition would cease once the person recovered.
Any ensuing episode of the disease would be considered work-related only if medical evidence supported such a continued relationship. In this way acceptance for precipitation may resemble acceptance for temporary aggravation. A claim can also be accepted for precipitation of a condition with no limit on the duration of the acceptance.
Back to Chapter 2-0805 Table of Contents
3. Evidence Needed. The question of causal relationship is a medical issue which usually requires reasoned medical opinion for resolution. This evidence should be obtained from a physician who has examined or treated the claimant for the condition for which compensation is claimed.
a. Physicians Qualified to Provide Opinions. As defined by 5 U.S.C. 8101 (2), the term "physician" includes surgeons, osteopathic practitioners, podiatrists, dentists, clinical psychologists, optometrists and chiropractors within the scope of their practice as defined by state law. Registered nurses (RNs), licensed practical nurses (LPNs), physician assistants, nurse practitioners, certified nursing assistants, social workers and physical therapists are not physicians under the Act and, therefore, are not qualified to provide medical opinion to establish causal relationship.
(1) A report of a physician assistant or a certified nurse practitioner will be considered medical evidence if countersigned by a qualified physician.
(2) A clinical psychologist may serve as a treating physician for a work-related emotional condition. See 20 C.F.R. 10.312.
(3) A chiropractor's opinion constitutes medical evidence only if a diagnosis of subluxation of the spine is made and supported by x-rays (Loras C. Digmann, 34 ECAB 1049). See 20 C.F.R. 10.311.
b. Sources of Medical Evidence. A medical report from the claimant's physician is required to consider the issue of causal relationship, though in some instances OWCP may refer the claimant for a second opinion examination (e.g. hearing loss claims). This report should include the physician's diagnosis of the condition found, the objective examination findings that establish that diagnosis, and opinion concerning the relationship, if any, between the condition and the injury or factors of employment claimed. The opinion may appear on a Form CA-16, Form CA-20, Form CA-5 or 5b (death claims), or in other medical forms or narrative reports.
c. When No Medical Report is Required. If all of the following criteria are satisfied, a claim may be accepted without a medical report:
(1) The condition reported is a minor one which can be identified on visual inspection by a lay person (e.g., burn, laceration, insect sting or animal bite); and
(2) The injury was witnessed or reported promptly, and no dispute exists as to the fact of injury.
d. When Medical Opinion is Required. If the circumstances noted above in 3c do not apply, the CE should determine whether a medical report addressing causal relationship is contained in the file. If no such report is present, the CE should request it from the claimant.
(1) In clear-cut traumatic injury claims, where the fact of injury is established and is clearly competent to cause the condition described (for instance, a worker falls from a scaffold and breaks an arm), a fully rationalized medical opinion is not needed. The physician's diagnosis and an affirmative statement are sufficient to accept the claim.
(2) In all other traumatic injury claims, and in occupational illness claims, rationalized medical opinion supporting causal relationship is required.
(3) Certain cases require directed development and specialized medical opinions.
(a) Claims for hearing loss require an opinion from a Board-certified specialist in otolaryngology. See PM 3-600.
(b) Claims for pulmonary conditions (e.g., exposure to asbestos) require an opinion from a Board-certified pulmonary specialist prior to acceptance. See PM 3-600.
(c) An extended occupational disease claim for an emotional condition must be supported by an opinion from a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist before the condition can be accepted. Because clinical psychologists are not licensed to treat physical disorders or prescribe medication, an opinion from a psychiatrist must be obtained where a non-mental component is present, a functional overlay is implicated, and/or medication is used. See PM 2-800-9.
e. Evidence Needed if an Underlying Condition Exists. In any case where a pre-existing condition involving the same part of the body is present and the issue of causal relationship therefore involves aggravation, acceleration or precipitation, the physician must provide rationalized medical opinion which differentiates between the effects of the work-related injury or disease and the pre-existing condition. Such evidence will permit the proper kind of acceptance (e.g., temporary vs. permanent aggravation).
Depending on the circumstances of the case, the CE may request the following:
(1) From the claimant:
(a) Full details of the pre-existing condition, including the approximate date it first appeared, the names and addresses of all physicians who examined or treated the claimant for this condition, and the approximate dates of such examinations and treatment.
(b) Reports from all physicians who examined or treated the claimant for the pre-existing condition, including surgical and hospital records.
(2) From the employing agency:
(a) A copy of the pre-employment physical examination, if one was performed.
(b) Copies of any other pertinent medical records maintained by the employing agency.
(c) A statement from the claimant's immediate superior describing the nature of any complaints made by the claimant, and any disability the claimant may have from performing his or her duties because of this condition.
Back to Chapter 2-0805 Table of Contents
4. Evaluating Medical Opinions.
a. Determining Causal Relationship. The degree of difficulty in determining causal relationship depends mainly on:
(1) The precise employment factors accepted as occurring within the performance of duty or the nature of the injury which is implicated;
(2) The nature of the disability or the cause of death for which compensation is claimed;
(3) The time which elapsed between the injury and the onset of the condition causing disability or death; and
(4) The employee's medical history.
b. When no opinion regarding causal relationship is provided by the attending physician, the claim generally can be denied provided appropriate development has been completed. Exceptions to this rule are where no medical opinion or medical report is required (see paragraph 3c above).
c. When the attending physician negates causal relationship between the condition and the employment factors, and no medical evidence to the contrary appears in the file, the case may be disallowed, provided appropriate development has been completed. No other medical opinion is required to support the denial.
d. The influence of the factors noted in 4a is shown by the following examples:
(1) An employee is hit by a truck while in the performance of duty and is immediately taken to a hospital, where a fracture of the right femur is found. It is clear that the fracture was caused by the truck accident, and the report from the attending physician supporting causal relationship would need no elaborate medical rationale.
Ninety days after the injury, symptoms of thrombophlebitis appear in the right leg and compensation is claimed for this condition. The passage of this amount of time between the injury and the development of the thrombophlebitis would create uncertainties regarding causal relationship. The report from the attending physician would need to include medical rationale to justify an opinion in support of causal relationship.
Six months later, the employee suffers a stroke while sitting quietly in an easy chair at home. The employee claims additional benefits for the stroke, alleging it was caused by the original injury of being struck by a truck. Two reasons now exist for questioning causal relationship: (a) nine months elapsed between the injury and the stroke, and (b) the original injury involved the leg, whereas the stroke may have resulted from a blood clot implicating the thrombophlebitis. Or the stroke may have resulted from a lesion in the brain, and no apparent physiological connection exists between the two. Any medical opinion in support of causal relationship would have to be based on a complete factual and medical background and justified by detailed medical rationale within a reasonable degree of medical certainty. Otherwise, the claimant's burden of proof would likely not be met.
(2) A nurse becomes disabled by pulmonary tuberculosis after a year of continuous employment on a ward where active tuberculosis patients were housed. If all other factors were negative, any medical opinion supporting causal relationship would require little or no rationale, as it would be apparent that the most probable source of the infection was in the employment.
If, however, investigation had revealed that the employee lived with a spouse in whom an advanced case of active pulmonary tuberculosis had been discovered 60 days before, two probable sources of the infection exist: the hospital where the employee was exposed for 40 hours per week in an atmosphere where the hazard was known and appropriate precautions were taken; and the home, where the hazard was unknown and no precautions were taken and where the contact was much more intimate and far exceeded 40 hours per week.
Under these circumstances, it would be more difficult to find that the employment was a proximate cause of the disease and any medical opinion in support of causal relationship would require a full description of the medical reasons justifying such an opinion.
Another variation involves the supposition of massive exposure at work and no exposure in private life, but with a positive skin test for tuberculosis prior to Federal employment. The major question then would be whether the current illness is a new disease process or a reactivation of an old one. This issue would require careful consideration, and any opinion which did not discuss all relevant factors and contain detailed rationale would not be sufficient to serve as the basis for acceptance.
Back to Chapter 2-0805 Table of Contents
5. Obtaining Additional Medical Opinion. If the CE determines that additional medical opinion is necessary, he/she may request an additional report from the claimant's physician or seek a second opinion. This may occur if medical evidence exists in the case file which indicates there is a causal relationship between the condition and employment factors, but the opinion is not fully rationalized. This, however, does not mean that the Office must accept a claim or that it must directly obtain further evidence.
a. Attending Physician. A list of questions may be sent to the attending physician, and a SOAF may be provided as the background for the case, if needed, based on the complexity of the case. See FECA PM 2-0809 for further discussion of SOAFs.
b. Second Opinion Specialist. In cases that cannot be adjudicated on the basis of the opinion provided by the claimant's physician, a SOAF should be prepared and an opinion should be requested from a physician who specializes in the pertinent field of medicine that pertains to the condition being claimed. FECA PM 3-0500.3 discusses such referrals. Also, see paragraph 3d(3) above and 5 U.S.C. 8123(a).
c. Referee Specialist. A conflict of medical opinion may be created when opinions of the attending physician and the second opinion are of approximately equal weight. When this occurs, the entire case file should be referred to a board-certified specialist in the pertinent field of medicine that is appropriate for the issue in conflict. FECA PM 3-0500.4 addresses these referrals. See also 5 U.S.C. 8123 (a).
d. Questions to the Physician. Questions should be as precise as possible, and they should be tailored to the particular circumstances of the case and the particular issue at hand. The CE should ask case-specific questions and avoid asking general questions, those which can be interpreted in more than one way, and those which suggest a certain answer. For instance, the question, "If there was an aggravation, was it temporary or permanent?" is preferable to, "When did the temporary aggravation cease?"
To prevent unnecessary delays in adjudication, the CE should identify and address all medical issues which need resolution before requesting the additional opinion. For example, if acceptance of causal relationship will entail a further decision about the extent of disability, the claimant's fitness for duty, or the appropriateness of medical care, these issues should be formulated in precise questions to the physician. However, the CE should avoid asking questions unnecessary to the issue at hand. For instance, any questions regarding any related permanent partial impairment would be premature if causal relationship had yet to be established.
Back to Chapter 2-0805 Table of Contents
6. High-Risk Employment. Certain kinds of employment routinely present situations which may lead to infection by contact with animals, human blood, bodily secretions, and other substances. Conditions such as HIV infection and hepatitis B more commonly represent a work hazard in health care facilities, correctional institutions, and drug treatment centers, among others, than in Federal workplaces as a whole. Likewise, claims for brucellosis, anthrax, and similar diseases will most often arise among veterinarians and others who regularly work with livestock.
Establishing causal relationship in these types of complex cases usually requires an in-depth discussion of causal relationship by an appropriate specialist (whether it is the claimant's physician or a second opinion specialist). When writing to a specialist, the CE should include a SOAF to provide a complete and accurate factual background for the specialist to render his/her opinion.
The CE can accept the claim for a physical injury where one exists while developing the claim for a more serious condition (e.g., a puncture wound may be accepted while any claimed hepatitis is developed).
Note: OWCP does not authorize payment for preventive measures such as vaccines and inoculations, and in general, preventive treatment may be a responsibility of the employing agency under the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 7901; however, OWCP can authorize treatment in specific circumstances. See 20 C.F.R. § 10.313.
a. Physical Injury and Prophylactic Treatment. For claims based on transmission of a communicable disease where the means of transmission and the incubation period are medically feasible, the CE should do the following:
(1) If the source of infection is a known or probable carrier of the disease, the CE should accept the case for the physical injury involved and authorize prophylactic treatment (see FECA PM 3-0400).
(2) If the source of infection is unidentified or the source's status is unknown, the CE should accept the claim for the physical injury involved. Prophylactic treatment for the underlying disease will not be an issue, since a known carrier is not involved.
b. Testing for Presence of Disease. Incubation periods often last for several weeks or months (e.g., it is around 120 days for hepatitis B). Therefore, testing for the presence of the disease following a specific, known exposure may be delayed. Employees in occupations with high risks of exposure to specific diseases are often tested for these diseases at fixed intervals (e.g., a phlebotomist may be tested every three months for HIV infection). If the test results are positive, the CE may accept the case if:
(1) A known carrier is involved, and the claimant had neither a prior history of the disease nor exposure outside of employment; or
(2) A prior test was negative and a physical injury (such as a sexual assault) has been accepted, even if a known carrier is not involved, if the claimant's occupation puts him or her at continuous risk for contracting the disease in question and factors unrelated to work have not been identified as a source of infection. If such factors are present, the CE must carefully consider the medical probability of infection both outside and within the sphere of employment, as well as the incubation period of the disease.
Back to Chapter 2-0805 Table of Contents
7. Consequential and Intervening Injuries. After the original acceptance of a claim, an injury occurring outside the performance of duty may affect the compensability of an existing accepted injury.
a. Consequential Injury. This kind of injury occurs because of weakness or impairment caused by a work-related injury, and it may affect the same part of the body as the original injury or a different area altogether. For instance, a claimant with an accepted knee injury may fall at home because the weakened knee buckled. This incident will constitute a consequential injury whether the affected part of the body is the knee or some other area, such as the back or arm. Or, a claimant with an injured eye may compensate for loss of functioning by overuse of the other eye, which may result in a consequential injury.
ECAB has held that, when the primary injury is shown to have arisen in performance of duty, every natural consequence that flows from the injury is deemed to arise out of the employment, unless it is the result of an independent intervening cause which is attributable to the employee's own intentional conduct. The basic rule is that a subsequent injury, whether an aggravation of the original injury or a new and distinct injury, is compensable if it is the direct and natural result of a compensable primary injury. Sandra Dixon-Mills, 44 ECAB 882 (1993).
If such an injury is claimed, the CE should:
(1) Ask the claimant to provide a factual statement. Depending on the circumstances of the case, this statement should include the following:
(a) Why he/she believes the claimed consequential condition (and resulting disability, if any) is related to the already accepted work-related conditions.
(b) A detailed factual statement describing the claimed consequential condition from the date of last medical care through the present, including a description of whether symptoms were occasional or constant, and what made any symptoms worse or better.
(c) A description of the medical care received, and all periods of disability from work, from the date he/she returned to work.
(d) A description of the claimant's work activities since returning to work.
(e) A statement regarding whether the claimant has sustained any other injuries/illnesses, either on or off the job, since the original injury/illness.
(f) A description of any hobbies or activities, such as sports, volunteering, or another job, which may have affected the accepted work-related conditions and serve as an independent intervening cause that would break the chain of causation.
(2) Ask the claimant to furnish medical evidence. Though the request will vary depending on the circumstances in the case, this request should typically include the following:
(a) Copies of all medical records for the work-related condition from the date of discharge or date of last medical care through the present, including office visit notes, treatment notes, diagnostic test results, etc., if these are not already on file and/or a significant period of time has passed since receipt of any medical evidence.
(b) A comprehensive medical report from the claimant's physician that addresses the following:
(1) A description of the original mechanism of injury/work exposure and summary of the medical care received.
(2) A description of the current symptoms.
(3) Current objective findings upon examination.
(4) Results of all current diagnostic studies.
(5) Current diagnosis.
(6) The physician's opinion supported by a medical explanation as to the relationship between the accepted work-related condition(s) and the claimed consequential condition, if any.
(7) If disability is claimed as result of the consequential condition, a description of the work duties that the claimant cannot perform and the objective medical findings that form the basis of renewed disability for work.
(8) The recommended course of treatment.
(3) The CE should allow a reasonable time period for submission of the evidence (usually 30 days). After the time period has passed, the CE should adjudicate the claim for a consequential condition, and issue an acceptance letter or formal denial with appeal rights.
The CE may also seek further clarification from the claimant's physician if needed, or refer the case for review by the District Medical Advisor or to a second opinion examiner, prior to adjudicating the claim for a consequential condition.
b. Intervening Injury. An injury occurring outside the performance of duty to the same part of the body originally injured is referred to as an intervening injury if compensation is claimed subsequent to the second injury. In this case the CE must determine whether the disability is due to the second injury alone, or whether the effects of the first injury still contribute to the disability. Unless the second injury breaks the chain of causation between the original injury and the disability claimed, the disability will be considered related to the original incident.
For instance, if the claimant is recovering from rotator cuff surgery and slips on ice leaving the house and lands on the same shoulder and reinjures it, this would be considered an intervening injury. But since the claimant had not fully recovered from the approved shoulder surgery, the effects of the original shoulder injury and subsequent surgery would still be contributing to the disability, therefore the chain of causation was not completely broken.
(1) When an intervening injury has occurred and a subsequent period of disability has been claimed, the CE should obtain the following information from the claimant to resolve the issue of causal relationship:
(a) A statement giving full details of the second incident.
(b) Copies of all medical reports pertaining to treatment of this injury.
(c) A medical report containing a reasoned opinion concerning the relationship between the disability currently claimed and both the original injury and the intervening injury.
(d) Other information as described above for consequential injuries may also be requested, as needed.
(2) As with consequential injuries, additional medical development may be necessary to confirm or deny the alleged causal relationship.
Back to Chapter 2-0805 Table of Contents