Consolidated policy statement

APP scams reimbursement
requirement
May 2025




PS25/5
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement     PS25/5




Contents
1             Executive summary                                            3
2             Our approach                                                 4
3             The policy requirements                                      8
4             The reporting requirement                                  19
5             Additional guidance                                        21
6             Cost benefit analysis                                      29




Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025        2
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                               PS25/5




1         Executive summary
1.1       In a series of publications beginning with PS23/3: Fighting authorised push payment fraud:
          a new reimbursement requirement, we set out how we would introduce a new
          reimbursement requirement for authorised push payment (APP) fraud within the
          Faster Payments system. That requirement came into effect on 7 October 2024.

1.2       This document aims to consolidate our previous publications and provide a single point of
          reference for those who wish to understand our reimbursement requirement and how it
          may affect them. In addition, in February 2024, we invited interested parties to write to us
          if they wanted us to clarify any areas of our APP scam reimbursement requirement policy
          that they were unsure about, or if they felt the words in our previous publications were
          ambiguous. Chapter Five of this document includes summaries of the most significant
          and frequently asked questions we received.

1.3       We are issuing this document as general guidance. Although this is intended to
          help readers interpret our policy, our definitive requirements are set out in our legal
          instruments, which are on our website. 1 Pay.UK, as the Payment System Operator for
          Faster Payments, maintains the Faster Payments reimbursement rules which are on its
          website. 2 If any of the contents of this document vary with either our legal instruments or
          the Faster Payments reimbursement rules, the latter two prevail.

1.4       We have also published our requirements for reimbursement of APP fraud committed over
          the CHAPS payment system. Those requirements are substantially the same as for Faster
          Payments and, except where otherwise indicated, this document applies to payments
          made over both Faster Payments and CHAPS. The Bank of England, as the Payment
          System Operator for CHAPS, maintains the CHAPS reimbursement rules which are on its
          website. If any of the contents of this document vary with either our legal instruments or
          the CHAPS reimbursement rules, the latter two prevail.

1.5       We will aim to keep this document under review and, if need be, updated in line with
          any material revisions we make to our reimbursement requirement. We will communicate
          any such revisions and, if need be, consult on them before we formally announce or
          implement them.




1     www.psr.org.uk/our-work/app-scams/
2     www.wearepay.uk/wp-content/uploads/2024/12/FPS-Reimbursement-Rules-Schedule-4.pdf


Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                     3
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                               PS25/5




2 Our approach
           Authorised push payments (APPs) are a type of electronic transfer payment order. In the
           UK, most APPs are made over a payment system called Faster Payments, an inter-bank
           facility operated by Pay.UK.
           In 2023, Parliament enacted the Financial Services and Markets Act 2023 which required us
           to introduce a reimbursement requirement for qualifying cases of APP scam fraud. We have
           implemented Parliament’s requirement by using our legal powers to require Pay.UK, the
           operator of Faster Payments, to introduce Faster Payments scheme rules that give effect
           to the reimbursement policy, and for all PSPs to comply with Pay.UK’s scheme rules.
           Alongside our June 2023 policy statement, the Bank of England (as the operator of
           CHAPS) announced that it was committed to achieving comparable protection for
           consumers using CHAPS. We have supported the Bank’s commitment by issuing a
           separate legal instrument for CHAPS.



           Authorised push payment scams
2.1        Most people encounter APPs when they log in online to their payment account and choose
           to send a payment by entering the account number and sort code of a recipient, then
           authorising the sending (‘pushing’) of a payment to the recipient account they have
           designated. This method can be used to pay for a wide range of goods and services.

2.2        APP scams are a type of fraud whereby a consumer is deceived into voluntarily sending
           an APP to either an unintended recipient, or for an unintended purpose.

2.3        In the UK, most APPs are made over Faster Payments, a service operated by a not-for-
           profit organisation called Pay.UK, which is itself jointly owned by a subset of the UK’s
           major banks. A number of APP scams occur over a payment system called CHAPS.


           The Financial Services and Markets Act 2023
2.4        Section 72(1) of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2023 (FSMA 2023) required us to
           ‘prepare and publish a draft of a relevant requirement for reimbursement in such qualifying
           cases of payment orders as the Regulator considers should be eligible for reimbursement’.
           Section 71(2) adds that ‘a ‘qualifying case’’ is where ‘(a) the case relates to a payment
           order executed over the Faster Payments Scheme, and (b) the payment order was
           executed subsequent to fraud or dishonesty’. 3




3     Financial Services and Markets Act 2023: www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2023/29/section/72


Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                  4
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                  PS25/5




2.5        The reimbursement requirement we have introduced following FSMA 2023 applies
           to payments – executed by the sending payment service provider (PSP) following an
           authorisation given by its consumer – to an account controlled by a person other than
           the consumer, where the consumer has been deceived into granting that authorisation
           as part of an APP fraud case. This includes where:

            • the payer intends to transfer the funds to a person other than the recipient, but is
              deceived into transferring the funds to the recipient
            • the payer intends to transfer the funds to the recipient but is deceived as to the
              purposes of the funds they are transferring

2.6        All types of APP fraud, regardless of the character or methods of the fraud itself, are within
           the scope of the new reimbursement requirement.


           How we have implemented Parliament’s
           legislative requirements
2.7        We are an independent regulator established by Parliament under the Financial Services
           (Banking Reform) Act 2013 (FSBRA 2013). 4 Under this, we must exercise our regulatory
           functions in relation to any payment system designated by statutory order by His Majesty’s
           Treasury (HMT). To date, there are ten such orders in effect. 5

2.8        Each designated payment system has a responsible payment system operator (PSO), an
           organisation responsible for its day-to-day administration. It must create and oversee rules
           for the operation of that system, and is subject to our regulatory supervision. Pay.UK is the
           PSO for Faster Payments, and the PSO for CHAPS is the Bank. 6

2.9        To implement Parliament’s requirements, we issued a series of legal instruments through
           our powers under FSBRA 2013. The object of those instruments was to embed our
           reimbursement policy into the Faster Payments rules, and require in-scope PSPs to comply
           with the Faster Payments reimbursement rules and CHAPS reimbursement rules.

           Table 1: Summary of our APP scams legal instruments


           Specific Requirement 1 Requires Pay.UK to place into the Faster Payments Scheme
                                  Rules our reimbursement requirement, to be known as the
                                  Faster Payments reimbursement rules, and for that requirement
                                  to extend to directed PSPs which provide relevant accounts and
                                  use Faster Payments.

           Specific Direction 19          Requires Pay.UK to put in place mechanisms to monitor
                                          and improve the compliance of directed PSPs with the
                                          reimbursement requirement, and to collect compliance information
                                          from directed PSPs and report that information to the PSR.7




4     www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2013/33/contents
5     www.psr.org.uk/how-we-regulate/who-we-regulate/
6     The PSR does not have any statutory authority over the Bank of England.
7     www.psr.org.uk/media/cbrcixgu/amended-specific-direction-19-july-2024.pdf


Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                     5
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                 PS25/5




            Specific Direction 20         Requires Faster Payments directed PSPs to comply with the
                                          Faster Payments reimbursement rules issued by Pay.UK.

            Specific Direction 21         Creates a similar and parallel set of obligations for PSPs that
                                          participate in CHAPS by requiring CHAPS-directed PSPs to comply
                                          with the CHAPS reimbursement rules issued by the Bank.


2.10        Copies of our legal instruments are available on our website. 8


            The role of Pay.UK
2.11        Our goal is for Pay.UK, as the relevant PSO, to run Faster Payments in a way that ensures
            that consumers are protected, and fraud is prevented from entering the system. In 2022,
            we published our five-year strategy, and set out that we wanted to give Pay.UK a stronger
            role to lead the development of protections for payment system users. 9

2.12        Our view is that Pay.UK is the appropriate body in the long term to make, maintain, refine,
            monitor, and enforce day-to-day compliance with comprehensive scheme rules that
            address fraud risks in the system.

2.13        As the operator of Faster Payments, Pay.UK has created a compliance and monitoring
            regime for all requirements across all in-scope PSPs (including indirect participants), as
            required by Specific Direction 19. 10 While this approach acknowledges that, in conjunction
            with industry, Pay.UK is best positioned to assess the most effective and efficient
            monitoring approach, we require Pay.UK to make the data it collates for compliance and
            monitoring available to us, so that we can be satisfied PSPs are complying with our
            reimbursement requirement.


            The role of the Bank
2.14        Alongside our June 2023 policy statement, the Bank (as the operator of CHAPS)
            announced that it was committed to achieving comparable protections for consumers
            using CHAPS. 11 While the focus of CHAPS is wholesale payments, it is also used by
            consumers for some high-value and/or time-sensitive transactions, including asset
            purchases. It is high-confidence as both the payer and the recipient know when the
            payment has been processed. Ensuring those consumers are sufficiently protected when
            using the UK’s payment systems is a strategic priority for us.

2.15        CHAPS is a designated payment system under FSBRA 2013 and the Bank is the PSO
            for CHAPS. It retains responsibility for the system, including the CHAPS rules. The Bank
            introduced reimbursement rules for CHAPS and we used our powers under FSBRA
            to direct PSPs who participate in CHAPS to ensure that the CHAPS APP scam
            reimbursement requirement (and all related requirements, such as data retention
            and reporting) apply consistently to all in-scope PSPs.



8      www.psr.org.uk/our-work/app-scams/
9      www.psr.org.uk/media/k1rb52zq/psr-strategy-summary-version-jan-2022.pdf
10     www.psr.org.uk/media/cbrcixgu/amended-specific-direction-19-july-2024.pdf
11     www.bankofengland.co.uk/payment-and-settlement/chaps


Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                      6
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                        PS25/5




2.16        The Bank has published the CHAPS reimbursement rules, which set out the detail of how
            PSPs should adhere to the reimbursement requirement. It broadly aligns these to the
            Faster Payments reimbursement rules to the extent possible, allowing for nuances
            between the payment systems. 12

2.17        The Bank has also developed a compliance monitoring regime for CHAPS, which is broadly
            consistent with the one Pay.UK has created for Faster Payments. The CHAPS data that
            PSPs will need to report to the Bank is set out in the CHAPS Compliance Data Reporting
            Standard (CCDRS). We have worked closely with the Bank to agree a process whereby it
            will share data with us to help us monitor compliance with SD21 and escalate potential
            compliance issues. To ensure that we can monitor compliance with SD21 effectively, we
            included within SD21 a provision that obliges in-scope PSPs to share with us a copy of any
            report provided to the Bank if we need it.


            Possible future revisions to our legal instruments
2.18        We expect Pay.UK will continue to take an increasing role in maintaining and updating the
            Faster Payments reimbursement rules. Over time, it is likely that the operation of those
            reimbursement rules will improve, and we have previously explained that we will continue
            to support Pay.UK in making any revisions that help optimise them. In most cases, any
            revisions to the Faster Payments reimbursement rules will be identified, designed, and
            implemented by Pay.UK, and we will play a supporting role. We expect Pay.UK to work
            closely with the Bank to maintain alignment between the Faster Payments and CHAPS
            rules where appropriate.

2.19        Recognising that our legal instruments will likely need revising from time to time, and that
            those affected should be able to anticipate when those revisions may happen, we
            proposed that we make those changes according to the following principles:

             • Wherever necessary changes to the Faster Payments reimbursement rules can be
               made solely by amending the scheme rules, then Pay.UK, working with PSPs and
               their representative bodies, should make them, with our support.
             • Wherever necessary changes to the Faster Payments reimbursement rules cannot be
               made without amending our legal instruments, we will try to issue amendments in
               April and October in any given year.
             • If an urgent change to the Faster Payments reimbursement rules is required, that
               cannot be made without amending our legal instruments, we may issue an
               amendment in months other than April and October in any given year.




12     www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/payments/chaps/chaps-reimbursement-rules-explanatory-notes.pdf


Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                              7
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                            PS25/5




3 The policy requirements
          In this chapter, we set out the policy elements of our Faster Payments and CHAPS APP
          scam reimbursement requirement, including in-scope consumers and transactions, and the
          exceptions and limitations on our policy.
          We have set out the basic framework of how a PSP should receive and process a claim
          and determine whether that claim should result in reimbursement for the consumer.



          Summary
3.1       Our reimbursement requirement has introduced consistent minimum standards to reimburse
          victims of APP fraud. The reimbursement requirement is underpinned by ten key policies.

          Table 2: Summary of APP scams reimbursement policy


          1     Reimbursement requirement for APP fraud in Faster Payments and CHAPS.
                Sending PSPs must reimburse all consumers who fall victim to APP fraud (noting the
                exceptions and limits set out in policies 3 to 10).
                The reimbursement requirement does not apply to civil disputes, payments which
                take place across other payment systems, international payments, or payments made
                for unlawful purposes.

          2     Sharing the cost of reimbursement. Receiving PSPs must, subject to the limits set
                out below on page 15 of this document, pay sending PSPs 50% of the reimbursement
                that the sending PSP paid to the consumer. The Faster Payments and CHAPS
                reimbursement rules specify the time period within which receiving PSPs should
                reimburse sending PSPs.

          3     Exceptions for APP fraud claims. There are two exceptions to reimbursement under
                the new reimbursement requirement. Where the consumer has acted fraudulently
                (‘first-party fraud’), and where the consumer has acted with gross negligence. This
                latter exception is known as the consumer standard of caution exception.

          4     Time limit to reimburse. Sending PSPs must reimburse consumers within five
                business days under the new reimbursement requirement. Under certain
                circumstances, the sending PSP can ‘stop the clock’.

          5     Claim excess. Sending PSPs have the option to apply a claim excess under the new
                reimbursement requirement. We have set the maximum permitted claim excess at £100.

          6     Minimum threshold. There is no separate minimum value threshold for APP fraud
                claims under the new reimbursement requirement.




Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                 8
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                                PS25/5




           7      Maximum level of reimbursement. There is a maximum level of reimbursement for
                  APP fraud claims (by value) under the new reimbursement requirement. We have set
                  the maximum level for Faster Payments at £85,000. The Bank has set the maximum
                  level for CHAPS at £85,000.

           8      Time limit to claim. Sending PSPs can deny APP scam claims submitted more than
                  13 months after the final payment in a given claim.

           9      Treatment of vulnerable consumers. The consumer standard of caution exception
                  and claim excess must not be applied to vulnerable consumers.

           10 Multi-step fraud cases are within scope. The new reimbursement requirement
              applies to multi-step payments.



           Transactions within scope of the reimbursement
           requirement
3.2        The new reimbursement requirement applies to Faster Payments and CHAPS payments
           sent and received by PSPs in the UK across the Faster Payments system, including
           payment initiation service (PIS) transactions.

3.3        The new reimbursement requirement does not apply to:

               • payments which take place across other payment systems – for example, if a
                 consumer sends funds to their account at a crypto exchange and then pays a
                 fraudster via a cryptocurrency
               • payments made before 7 October 2024
               • international payments 13
               • payments made for unlawful purposes
               • civil disputes, such as where a consumer has paid a legitimate supplier for goods or
                 services but has not received them, they are defective in some way, or the consumer
                 is otherwise dissatisfied with the supplier.

3.4        Civil disputes do not meet our definition of an APP fraud as the consumer has not been
           deceived. The law already protects consumer rights when purchasing goods and services,
           including through the Consumer Rights Act. We have produced separate guidance for
           PSPs that helps them distinguish between an APP scam and a civil dispute. 14




13    Please note Page 27, which provides further guidance on borderless accounts which may be within scope of the
      reimbursement requirement.
14    www.psr.org.uk/publications/policy-statements/ps246-supporting-the-identification-of-app-scams-and-civil-disputes/


Payment Systems Regulator                                     May 2025                                                     9
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                   PS25/5




            PSPs within scope of the reimbursement
            requirement
3.5         The reimbursement requirement applies to all PSPs participating in the Faster Payments
            Scheme and/or CHAPS, whether directly or indirectly, that offer relevant accounts and/or
            relevant CHAPS accounts.

3.6         A ‘relevant account’ or ‘relevant CHAPS account’ mean an account that is provided to
            a service user, is held in the UK, and can send or receive payments via Faster Payments
            and/or CHAPS, but excludes accounts provided by credit unions, municipal banks,
            Financial Market Infrastructures (for CHAPS), and national savings banks. 15


            Start date for the reimbursement requirement
3.7         The reimbursement requirement came into effect on 7 October 2024. This means that
            any reimbursable Faster Payments or CHAPS APP scam payments that took place on or
            after 7 October 2024 are covered by it.

3.8         Where any claim is made up of a series of payments, any payments made prior to the start
            date for the new reimbursement requirement are not covered by it.

3.9         The start date does not prevent PSPs from voluntarily reimbursing victims of APP fraud for
            any payments that took place before 7 October 2024, including providing reimbursement
            under the contingent reimbursement model (CRM) Code. 16


            Consumers covered by the reimbursement
            requirement
3.10        The new reimbursement requirement applies to APP scam payments executed by
            individuals, microenterprises, and charities. 17 This largely echoes the scope of complainants
            who may apply to the Financial Ombudsman Service under the FCA’s DISP rules. 18


            The processing of claims
3.11        The core process for receiving and assessing claims involves four steps:

              • Step one: Consumer reports a suspected APP scam to their PSP
              • Step two: PSP gathers information and assesses whether the consumer is eligible
                for reimbursement
              • Step three: Eligible claims are reimbursed to the consumer, ineligible claims are rejected
              • Step four: All receiving PSPs pay their contribution to the cost of reimbursement.




15     See also Page 30 for further guidance on relevant accounts
16     For more details on the CRM Code, see: www.lendingstandardsboard.org.uk/crm-code/
17     www.psr.org.uk/media/xenefhgp/amended-specific-requirement-1-july-2024-corrected.pdf p.12
18     www.handbook.fca.org.uk/handbook/DISP/2/?view=chapter DISP 2.7.3


Payment Systems Regulator                                    May 2025                                    10
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                         PS25/5




3.12        These steps are illustrated in the diagram below.

            Figure 1: A typical APP scams payment and reimbursement journey




            Consumer reports a suspected APP scam
3.13        The consumer standard of caution exception requires that a consumer should, upon learning
            or suspecting that they have fallen victim to an APP scam, report it promptly to their sending
            PSP and, in any event, not more than 13 months after the date on which the last APP scam
            payment forming part of that claim was executed.19 PSPs should provide accessible, non-
            discriminatory means for consumers to notify them of suspected or actual APP scams.

3.14        Pay.UK’s Faster Payments reimbursement rules (and the CHAPS reimbursement rules)
            require that a sending PSP, when receiving an APP scam claim, must notify any receiving
            PSPs identified in the claim within two hours. 20 Where a PSP, ‘knows’ or ‘suspects’ that
            a person is engaged in money laundering or dealing in criminal property, they must submit
            a Suspicious Activity Report, and follow any legal obligations they are subject to. 21

            Sending PSP assesses the claim
3.15        The Faster Payments and CHAPS reimbursement rules require that the sending PSP
            must notify all receiving PSPs of the existence of a claim, and give those receiving PSPs
            an opportunity to provide evidence that has a bearing on the determination of a claim. 22
            The sending PSP has the sole responsibility for determining whether a claim qualifies for
            reimbursement. We expect sending PSPs to gather and take into account all relevant
            evidence when processing a claim.


19     For more details about the consumer standard of caution exception, see page 15.
20     Rule 4.1 of the Faster Payments reimbursement rules - www.wearepay.uk/wp-content/uploads/2024/12/FPS-
       Reimbursement-Rules-Schedule-4.pdf
21     For more information on Suspicious Activity Reports, see: www.nationalcrimeagency.gov.uk/what-we-do/crime-
       threats/money-laundering-and-illicit-finance/suspicious-activity-reports
22     Rule 4.2 and 4.3 of the Faster Payments reimbursement rules - www.wearepay.uk/wp-
       content/uploads/2024/12/FPS-Reimbursement-Rules-Schedule-4.pdf


Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                            11
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                             PS25/5




3.16        The consumer standard of caution exception requires that the consumer should respond to
            any reasonable and proportionate requests for information made by their sending PSP for
            any of the purposes set out in paragraph 5.4 of Specific Requirement 1, which includes:

              • Gathering information from the victim(s) (or their agent) to assess whether the claim
                is a reimbursable APP scam claim.
              • That a claims management company is submitting a legitimate claim – for example,
                validating that the victim has authorised the company to submit a claim.
              • Gathering additional information from a victim to assess their vulnerability. 23

            Sending PSP approves or rejects the claim
3.17        Once the sending PSP has completed its assessment of the claim, it should notify the
            consumer of the outcome and any reimbursement they will receive. Where a claim
            is accepted, PSPs should reimburse consumers back to the account which made the payment,
            unless the consumer is using a claims management company or as otherwise required by law.

3.18        A sending PSP must explain to the consumer in writing its reasons for either approving
            or rejecting a claim. 24

            Sending PSP requests reimbursement contribution from
            receiving PSP(s)
3.19        Once the sending PSP has reimbursed the consumer, it may request reimbursement
            contributions from receiving PSP(s). Neither sending nor receiving PSPs can, at present,
            reliably detect 100% of APP fraud, but both can take steps to detect potential frauds.
            If they suspect fraud, they can refuse payment orders or block accounts. We consider
            that receiving PSPs need adequate financial incentives to do more to detect fraud and
            prevent fraud losses, because they provide the accounts that fraudsters control and use.

3.20        The sending PSP is solely responsible for assessing each claim and determining whether
            it includes any reimbursable APP scam payment.

3.21        Once a sending PSP has reimbursed their consumer the value of any reimbursable APP
            scam payments, the sending PSP can require 50% of the amount from receiving PSP(s).
            They cannot request this contribution unless and until they have reimbursed the consumer.

3.22        The amount that any receiving PSP is liable to pay is determined in accordance with
            paragraph 5.12 of Specific Requirement 1. It must be the lower of 50% of either:

              • the amount the sending PSP has paid to the victim that is attributable to any
                reimbursable APP scam payments made to that receiving PSP

                 or

              • the required reimbursement amount that is attributable to any reimbursable APP
                scam payments made to that receiving PSP, if different. 25



23     There are presently five permitted purposes under paragraph 5.4 of Specific Requirement 1, although two of
       these do not place an obligation on consumers
24     Rules 4.11 and 4.12 of the Faster Payments reimbursement rules.
25     Rules 5.5 and 5.6 of the FPS reimbursement rules.


Payment Systems Regulator                                    May 2025                                               12
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                                PS25/5




3.23        The receiving PSP must pay the sending PSP the specified amount within a reasonable
            period of time, as defined by Pay.UK in the Faster Payments reimbursement rules 26 and
            by the Bank in the CHAPS reimbursement rules.

3.24        If the sending PSP chooses not to apply the maximum claim excess value, and where
            there is a single receiving PSP, that receiving PSP may deduct 50% of the maximum claim
            excess amount from its reimbursement contribution.

3.25        Where, however, there are two or more receiving PSPs, each may deduct from their
            reimbursement contribution 50% of the maximum claim excess, split between the
            receiving PSPs in proportions which equate to the proportionate value of each receiving
            PSP’s liability for the reimbursable part of the APP scam claim.

3.26        In claims where there are multiple receiving PSPs, Pay.UK is responsible for setting out
            the way their respective contributions will be calculated.

            Timelines for processing claims
3.27        Sending PSPs should ordinarily process claims within five business days of receiving them.
            Sending PSPs may ‘stop the clock’, which has the effect of pausing the five business day
            requirement, if they have sought information to assess a claim and are waiting for a response
            in any of the circumstances set out in paragraph 5.4 of Specific Requirement 1, namely:

              • to gather information from the victim(s) (or their agent) or the receiving PSP to assess
                whether the claim is a reimbursable APP scam claim
              • to verify that a claims management company is submitting a legitimate claim – for
                example, validating that the victim has authorised the company to submit a claim
              • to gather additional information from a victim to assess their vulnerability
              • in cases where the sending PSP has evidence of fraud on the part of the person who
                made the APP scam claim, to gather additional information from the receiving PSP,
                law enforcement or other relevant parties
              • for multi-step scams, to gather additional information from the other PSPs involved

3.28        These are the only circumstances in which a sending PSP may ‘stop the clock’. Where a
            sending PSP exercises the ‘stop the clock’ provision, the five business day reimbursement
            timescale is paused at the point when the sending PSP sends its request for information.
            The five-day clock resumes as soon as the sending PSP receives a response.

3.29        The sending PSP can stop the clock as many times as necessary. However, it must close
            the claim before the end of the 35th business day following the reporting of the APP scam
            claim by the victim (or their agent) to the sending PSP. A receiving PSP that a sending PSP
            has asked to provide information about a reported APP scam claim must respond in a
            timely and accurate manner.




26     Rule 5.7 of the FPS reimbursement rules sets this as ‘within five business days following the notification from
       the sending PSP that the reimbursable contribution amount is payable’.


Payment Systems Regulator                                      May 2025                                                  13
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                          PS25/5




            Repatriated funds
3.30        We expect that sending and receiving PSPs will take all reasonable steps to secure
            the repatriation of funds lost to APP scams. Where a sending PSP has already reimbursed
            a consumer and funds are successfully repatriated, whether in whole or in part, paragraph
            5.17 of Specific Requirement 1 sets out how those repatriated funds are to be apportioned
            between sending and receiving PSPs, and the victim. The Faster Payments reimbursement
            rules and CHAPS reimbursement rules provide further detail on how this should work
            in practice. 27


            Exceptions and limitations
            Permitted excess
3.31        When we published PS23/3: Fighting authorised push payment fraud: a new
            reimbursement requirement, we said that sending PSPs can apply a claim excess to
            manage the risk of moral hazard. 28 This is the risk that consumers are likely to be less
            cautious if they are confident they will be reimbursed. We think that an excess set at
            the right level will encourage consumers to exercise caution when making a payment.
            We also confirmed that the excess would not apply to vulnerable consumers.

3.32        In PS23/4: Fighting authorised push payment scams: final decision, we confirmed that
            the excess would be set at a maximum value of £100, which we felt would also minimise
            financial harm to consumers, while encouraging them to exercise due caution before
            seeking to issue payment instructions to their PSP. 29

3.33        The sending PSP, when evaluating a claim, must decide whether to apply the excess,
            whether at the maximum value (£100) or lower (any value up to the maximum is
            permitted) to a reimbursable APP scam claim. The sending PSP also has the option
            to not apply an excess at all.

3.34        If a sending PSP chose not to apply an excess, or to apply an excess below the maximum
            of £100, it cannot claim the amount not levied from the receiving PSP as part of the 50-50
            liability split between them. All 50-50 liability splits must be calculated on the assumption
            that a £100 claim excess has been applied.

3.35        Where there are multiple receiving PSPs within a single APP scam claim, those receiving
            PSPs may share between them the value of 50% of the maximum claim excess amount.
            The share that each receiving PSP may choose to deduct from their specified amount shall
            be in proportion to their overall liability for the reimbursable portion of the APP scam claim
            in question. Proportionate liability is to be determined through provisions within the Faster
            Payments reimbursement rules set by Pay.UK and approved by us, 30 as well as the CHAPS
            reimbursement rules.




27     Rules 6.1 to 6.5 of the FPS reimbursement rules.
28     www.psr.org.uk/media/iolpbw0u/ps23-3-app-fraud-reimbursement-policy-statement-final-june-2023.pdf p. 32
29     www.psr.org.uk/media/kwlgyzti/ps23-4-app-scams-policy-statement-dec-2023.pdf p.32
30     Rules 5.5 and 5.6 of the FPS reimbursement rules.


Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                             14
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                      PS25/5




           Maximum reimbursement level
3.36       We have introduced a maximum level of reimbursement that can be awarded for any
           single APP scam claim. This applies to all APP scams claims made over Faster Payments
           and CHAPS, including claims from vulnerable consumers. This is to ensure consistency
           and set clear expectations for both firms and consumers.

3.37       We decided to set the maximum level that PSPs will have to reimburse victims of APP
           scams at £85,000 per claim. 31 We anticipated that this level would mean that 99.8% of all
           APP scams by volume, and 90% by value, would be fully reimbursed, providing they were
           in scope of the policy. This level also mitigates against possible prudential risks to PSPs,
           thereby protecting their consumers from any potential long-term adverse impacts.

3.38       We are keeping the maximum reimbursement level under review and will consider it as
           part of our 12-month evaluation of the reimbursement policy. While the maximum level is
           in line with the current Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS) deposit limit, it
           will not automatically track any changes to the FSCS limit, although we will take any such
           changes into account as part of our review.

3.39       The Bank, as the operator of CHAPS, has also set the maximum level for CHAPS APP
           scams to £85,000 per claim.

           Consumer standard of caution
3.40       There are two exceptions to the general reimbursement obligation:

             • where the consumer seeking reimbursement has acted fraudulently
             • where the consumer has acted with gross negligence

           We explained that the latter, which we termed the consumer standard of caution,
           would not apply to consumers who are vulnerable.

3.41       The concept of negligence implies a breach of a standard of care. In our publication,
           The consumer standard of caution exception (December 2023), we specified what
           requirements PSPs should expect of their consumers when sending a payment as:

             • The requirement to have regard to interventions: Consumers should have
               regard to specific, directed interventions made either by their sending PSP, or by
               a competent national authority. That intervention must offer a clear assessment of
               the probability that an intended payment is an APP scam payment.
             • The prompt reporting requirement: Consumers should, upon learning or suspecting
               that they have fallen victim to an APP scam, report the matter promptly to their PSP and,
               in any event, not more than 13 months after the last relevant payment was authorised.
             • The information sharing requirement: Consumers should respond to any
               reasonable and proportionate requests for information made by their PSP to help them
               assess a reimbursement claim. This includes requests under our ‘stop the clock’ rules.




31     www.psr.org.uk/media/e30pwlly/ps24-7-app-scams-maximum-level-of-reimbursement-policy-statement-oct-
       2024.pdf


Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                         15
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                        PS25/5




              • The police reporting requirement: Consumers should, after making a
                reimbursement claim, and upon request by their PSP, consent to the PSP reporting
                to the police on the consumer’s behalf or request the consumer report directly the
                details of an APP scam to a competent national authority. 32

3.42        Where a PSP can demonstrate that a consumer who has not been classed as vulnerable
            has, through gross negligence, not met one or more of these four requirements, the PSP
            is not obliged to reimburse the consumer.

3.43        The burden of proof falls exclusively upon the PSP to demonstrate that a consumer has acted
            with gross negligence. PSPs should not introduce, in their contractual agreements with their
            consumers, any terms and conditions that have the effect of shifting this burden of proof onto
            the consumer, or of requiring the consumer to disprove that they were grossly negligent.

3.44        Each reimbursement claim made by a consumer will need to be assessed on its individual
            merits to ascertain whether the consumer is eligible for reimbursement or has acted with
            gross negligence in not meeting the consumer standard of care. We interpret ‘gross
            negligence’ to be a higher standard than the standard of negligence under common law.
            The consumer needs to have shown a ‘significant degree of carelessness.’

3.45        Alongside The consumer standard of caution exception, we have issued guidance to assist
            PSPs in operationalising our policy goals, and to set out how they should comply with their
            legal obligations. 33

3.46        The Bank has incorporated the consumer standard of caution exception into its CHAPS
            reimbursement rules. 34 As such, the exception applies equally to CHAPS payments as to
            those made through Faster Payments.

            Vulnerable consumers
3.47        If, when assessing a consumer’s APP scam claim, a PSP believes that the consumer
            is vulnerable, it cannot apply either the consumer standard of caution exception nor
            the permitted claim excess.

3.48        The FCA has comprehensive guidance for firms on the fair treatment of vulnerable
            consumers. 35 We agree with the FCA’s position and want to see the fair treatment
            of vulnerable consumers embedded as part of firms’ culture. This includes firms
            understanding the nature and scale of vulnerability among their current and target
            consumers, being able to spot signs of vulnerability, and setting up systems and processes
            in a way that will support and enable vulnerable consumers to disclose their needs.

3.49        As part of assessing an APP fraud case, the sending PSP should assess the consumer’s
            situation and any potential vulnerability in line with the FCA’s guidance: ‘Firms should
            consider consumers’ vulnerability and capacity to make decisions when deciding how
            to treat consumers who have been victims of scams or fraud’. 36



32     www.psr.org.uk/media/tbbdhkcx/sr1-consumer-standard-of-caution-exception-dec-2023.pdf
33     www.psr.org.uk/media/as3a0xan/sr1-consumer-standard-of-caution-guidance-dec-2023.pdf
34     Annex A to the CHAPS Reference Manual – CHAPS reimbursement rules, para 3.6: www.bankofengland.co.uk/-
       /media/boe/files/payments/chaps/chaps-reimbursement--rules-annex-1.pdf
35     https://www.fca.org.uk/publications/finalised-guidance/guidance-firms-fair-treatment-vulnerable-customers
36     www.fca.org.uk/publication/finalised-guidance/fg21-1.pdf


Payment Systems Regulator                                    May 2025                                          16
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                       PS25/5




3.50        PSPs should evaluate each consumer's individual circumstances case-by-case to help
            them determine the extent to which their characteristics of vulnerability, whether
            temporary or enduring, led to them being defrauded, and therefore whether they meet
            the definition of vulnerability. This aligns with the FCA’s guidance.

3.51        As set out in FCA guidance, ‘[consumers] with some characteristics of vulnerability may
            be more likely to fall victim to scams’. 37 Some types of vulnerability can impair decision-
            making, putting people at greater risk from social engineering and less able to exercise
            caution to protect themselves from APP fraud. There is therefore a weaker case for
            applying exceptions designed to incentivise consumer caution to these types of vulnerable
            consumers. If a consumer is deemed vulnerable in relation to a specific APP fraud, the
            sending PSP must not apply the consumer standard of caution exception or claim excess.

3.52        For the new reimbursement requirement, all firms should consistently apply the FCA’s
            definition to identify consumers vulnerable to APP fraud: ‘A vulnerable [consumer] is
            someone who, due to their personal circumstances, is especially susceptible to harm,
            particularly when a firm is not acting with appropriate levels of care’. 38 This means all firms
            are working to a single definition of vulnerability.

3.53        However, this is not a blanket exception for all consumers who exhibit any characteristics
            of vulnerability. PSPs are expected to comply with the FCA’s guidance on vulnerability and
            be mindful of their obligations under the Consumer Duty.


            PSP duties to amend consumers’ terms
            and conditions
3.54        In PS24/3: Faster Payments APP scams reimbursement compliance and monitoring,
            we confirmed that we will require all directed PSPs capable of being a sending PSP and
            which provide relevant accounts to consumers, to amend the terms and conditions of their
            contracts with those consumers. 39 This clarifies the consumer’s right to reimbursement
            and allows consumers to enforce those rights through the courts as with any other
            contractual obligation of the PSP included in their framework contracts.

3.55        We expect PSPs to make these changes as soon as is practicable and allowed them
            until 9 April 2025 to comply.

3.56        In addition to requiring PSPs to amend their terms and conditions, we required them to
            notify consumers of their rights, in line with how they would notify them of changes to any
            other service. 40 We have produced separate guidance for firms on how they may choose
            to fulfil this requirement. 41




37     www.fca.org.uk/publication/finalised-guidance/fg21-1.pdf p.15
38     www.fca.org.uk/publication/finalised-guidance/fg21-1.pdf p.3
39     www.psr.org.uk/media/y0yfbiy1/ps24-3-fps-app-scams-reimbursement-compliance-and-monitoring-july-2024.pdf
       p. 33
40     www.psr.org.uk/media/y0yfbiy1/ps24-3-fps-app-scams-reimbursement-compliance-and-monitoring-july-2024.pdf
       p. 34
41     www.psr.org.uk/media/x4tji2en/psr-app-scams-psp-information-sheet-v3.pdf


Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                          17
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                        PS25/5




            Consumers’ right to appeal to the Financial
            Ombudsman Service
3.57        If a consumer is unhappy with how their PSP has assessed their APP scam claim under our
            policy, then they can take their complaint to the Financial Ombudsman Service. The Financial
            Ombudsman Service will consider what is fair and reasonable in the circumstances.42


            CHAPS
3.58        Recognising that criminals operate across multiple payment systems, in December 2023
            we committed to support the introduction of similar reimbursement requirements for
            CHAPS. We have continued to work closely with the Bank as it has developed its
            reimbursement rules. 43

3.59        We have directed in-scope CHAPS participants to reimburse their consumers who fall
            victim to an APP scam over CHAPS. 44

3.60        This direction will support effective implementation of the Bank’s CHAPS reimbursement
            rules which contain the detailed parameters of the policy. Our direction is closely aligned
            with Specific Direction 20 (SD20) in Faster Payments, and the Bank’s reimbursement rules
            are aligned with Pay.UK’s reimbursement rules, to the extent possible. This approach will
            deliver consistent and effective consumer outcomes across CHAPS and Faster Payments
            for APP scams.

3.61        The CHAPS reimbursement requirement came into effect on 7 October 2024, the same
            date that the Bank’s reimbursement rules came into effect, and the same date that the
            Faster Payments APP scams reimbursement requirement came into effect.




42     www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk/businesses/complaints-deal/fraud-scams/app-fraud-scams-involving-
       authorised-payments
43     The CHAPS reimbursement rules are available on the Bank of England’s website: www.bankofengland.co.uk/-
       /media/boe/files/payments/chaps/chaps-reimbursement--rules-annex-1.pdf
44     www.psr.org.uk/media/yxbh4dvt/specific-direction-21-chaps-reimbursement-september-2024.pdf


Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                             18
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                      PS25/5




4 The reporting requirement
           We require PSPs to record, retain, and share information sufficient for Pay.UK as PSO
           to monitor compliance with the Faster Payments reimbursement rules, and for Pay.UK
           to make information available to us to undertake our regulatory functions.
           This chapter sets out how we have implemented the reporting requirements on PSPs
           and Pay.UK, as well as for CHAPS.



           Introduction
4.1        As the operator of Faster Payments, Pay.UK has created a compliance and monitoring
           regime for all requirements across all in-scope PSPs (including indirect participants),
           as required by Specific Direction 19. 45 Although this approach acknowledges that, in
           conjunction with industry, Pay.UK is best positioned to assess the most effective
           and efficient monitoring approach, we require Pay.UK to make the data it collates for
           compliance and monitoring available to us, so that we can be satisfied PSPs are
           complying with our reimbursement requirement.

4.2        In PS24/3, we confirmed amendments to SD19 and SD20 which enable Pay.UK to
           collect data from all in-scope PSPs. 46 We have specified the data that PSPs are required
           to collect, record, verify, and share in our Compliance Data Reporting Standards (CDRS). 47

4.3        Where it has the power to do so (for direct participants), Pay.UK will take steps to address
           non-compliance with the Faster Payments reimbursement rules. We will retain our
           legislative responsibility for enforcing compliance with our directions, including the
           compliance of in-scope indirect Faster Payments participants.


           Our approach
           All in-scope PSPs required to register with Pay.UK
4.4        We required, under Specific Direction 20, all in-scope PSPs to register with Pay.UK by
           20 August 2024.

           Data reporting requirements
4.5        The data and information that PSPs must collate, retain, and provide to Pay.UK is contained
           within the CDRS. We have mandated two reporting standards in CDRS:

            • Reporting Standard A, which came into effect on 7 October 2024
            • Reporting Standard B, to come into effect on a date to be confirmed



45    www.psr.org.uk/media/cbrcixgu/amended-specific-direction-19-july-2024.pdf
46    www.psr.org.uk/media/y0yfbiy1/ps24-3-fps-app-scams-reimbursement-compliance-and-monitoring-july-2024.pdf
47    www.psr.org.uk/media/egvjalcq/psr-compliance-data-reporting-standards.pdf


Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                         19
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                     PS25/5




4.6         All directed PSPs are required to comply with all record-keeping requirements in the
            CDRS from 7 October 2024, regardless of which reporting standard is in place.

4.7         Pay.UK has specified how PSPs must report data to it under reporting standard A,
            in its Faster Payments reimbursement rules. PSPs must provide timely responses to
            appropriately scoped and reasonable requests for data and information from Pay.UK,
            if it suspects that an in-scope PSP is not compliant, or that it is reasonably likely that a
            directed PSP will not be compliant. Pay.UK must include its reasoning and evidence in
            any data and information requests it makes.

4.8         PSPs must assure themselves, in the manner required by Pay.UK and set out in its Faster
            Payments rules, of the accuracy and quality of any data they report under either reporting
            standard. They must also comply with the record-keeping obligations and store all such
            data and information on secure systems.

4.9         If a consumer raises an issue that may be in the scope of the APP scams reimbursement
            requirement, PSPs must collate, retain and include it in the data reported to Pay.UK, in
            line with the requirements of our reporting standards. PSPs are not, however, required
            to include issues reported by consumers which are unambiguously not in scope of the
            APP scams reimbursement requirement, in their reporting to Pay.UK.

            Future changes to CDRS
4.10        If the CDRS need any further amendments, we will consult on any proposals we make in
            line with our Powers and Procedures Guidance, alongside any other proposed changes to
            our APP scams legal instruments, in April or October of any given year. If the changes are
            urgent, we may consult on them outside this period. We will bring any changes into effect
            no sooner than 90 days after we have confirmed them. We will notify PSPs in writing of
            the date the changes will come into effect.


            CHAPS
4.11        In PS24/5, we set out the compliance and monitoring metrics that PSPs which participate
            in CHAPS will need to report to the Bank, as the operator of CHAPS, on a monthly basis.
            We also specified that this information may also be shared with us so that we can monitor
            compliance with Specific Direction 21. 48

4.12        These requirements are aligned with the metrics specified above for Faster Payments and
            set out in the CHAPS Compliance Data Reporting Standard, with the key difference that
            PSPs are not required to submit nil returns to the Bank, if they have not received any APP
            scam claims in the relevant reporting period. 49




48     www.psr.org.uk/media/th4jea5a/ps24-5-app-scams-chaps-reimbursement-sept-2024.pdf
49     www.psr.org.uk/media/spelz3p1/psr-chaps-compliance-data-reporting-standards-august-2024.pdf


Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                       20
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                PS25/5




5 Additional guidance
          In February 2024, we invited interested parties to write to us if they wanted us to clarify
          any areas of our APP scam reimbursement requirement policy that they were unsure
          about, or if they felt the words in our previous publications were ambiguous.
          Although these queries were raised in relation to Faster Payments, many of the answers
          may also apply to CHAPS, although it is for the Bank to make any final determinations on
          the proper interpretation of the CHAPS reimbursement rules.
          This chapter includes summaries of the most significant and frequently asked questions.


5.1       In responding to our February 2024 invitation to any interested parties to write to us to
          ask us to clarify the APP scam reimbursement requirement policy, some correspondents
          identified errors or omissions in our previous publications and legal instruments.
          Others offered constructive suggestions for how we might refine them.

5.2       We are grateful to all those who wrote to us and to those who suggested ways of refining
          or improving our policy. We have distilled into this chapter summaries of both the most
          frequently asked questions, and those where the answers may be of general interest.
          We have not replicated any confidential correspondence nor responded to questions
          about individual business models.

          Question 1: I am a PSP - am I within scope of the reimbursement
          requirement?
          Answer: Our legal instrument, Specific Requirement 1, defines an APP scam payment
          as an authorised push payment which has all the following features:

            • It is executed through Faster Payments.
            • It is authorised by the PSP’s consumer.
            • It is executed by that PSP in the UK.
            • The payment is received in a relevant account in the UK that is not controlled by
              the consumer.
            • The payment is not to the recipient the consumer intended, or not for the purpose
              the consumer intended.

          If a PSP sends or receives payments over Faster Payments, and those payments meet
          the above criteria, then both are potentially within scope of Specific Direction 20.

          It is for individual PSPs to determine the extent of any obligations they may have under
          Specific Direction 20.




Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                    21
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                 PS25/5




          Question 2: I am a PSP but provide my consumers with access to
          Faster Payments through an access arrangement with another
          PSP. Who is liable for claims: me or the PSP who provides access
          to Faster Payments?
          Answer: PSPs that are participants in Faster Payments, and provide access to Faster
          Payments to other PSPs who are not themselves participants, are known as Indirect
          Access Providers (IAPs). IAPs are not liable for claims raised against indirect participants in
          Faster Payments. It is the PSP that provides the relevant sending or receiving account that
          is liable for claims.

          Question 3: I am a consumer and was scammed before
          7 October 2024, can you help?
          Answer: Our APP scams reimbursement requirement only applies to transactions that
          took place on or after 7 October 2024. Any transactions that took place before that date
          fall outside the scope of our policy.

          Your PSP may have voluntarily signed up to an earlier reimbursement policy known as
          the Contingent Reimbursement Model Code. You can find out more about this on the
          Lending Standards Board’s website: www.lendingstandardsboard.org.uk/crm-code/

          You may also be able to raise a complaint with the Financial Ombudsman Service.
          Details are on its website: www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk/

          Question 4: If there are multiple receiving PSPs in an APP scam
          claim, how much permitted excess can each deduct from their
          reimbursement contribution?
          Answer: The sending PSP is responsible for assessing each claim and determining
          whether it includes any reimbursable APP scam payments. Once a sending PSP has
          reimbursed the consumer the value of any reimbursable APP scam payments, the sending
          PSP can require 50% of the amount from the receiving PSP. They cannot request this
          contribution unless and until they have reimbursed the consumer.

          The amount that the receiving PSP is liable to pay is determined according to paragraph
          5.12 of Specific Requirement 1. It must be the lower of 50% of:

            • the amount the sending PSP has paid to the victim that is attributable to any
              reimbursable APP scam payments made to that receiving PSP
                or
            • the required reimbursement amount that is attributable to any reimbursable APP scam
              payments made to that receiving PSP, if different

          The receiving PSP must pay the sending PSP the specified amount within a reasonable
          period of time, as defined by Pay.UK in the FPS reimbursement rules.

          If the sending PSP chooses not to apply the maximum claim excess value, and where
          there is a single receiving PSP, that receiving PSP may deduct 50% of the maximum claim
          excess amount from its reimbursement contribution.




Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                   22
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                 PS25/5




          Where, however, there are two or more receiving PSPs, each may deduct from their
          reimbursement contribution 50% of the maximum claim excess, split between the
          receiving PSPs in proportions which equate to the proportionate value of each receiving
          PSP’s liability for the reimbursable part of the APP scam claim.

          In claims where there are multiple receiving PSPs, Pay.UK is responsible for setting out
          the methods for calculating their respective contributions.

          Question 5: If a PSP manages to successfully repatriate funds lost
          to an APP scam, are those funds subject to a ‘first-in-first-out’ rule?
          Answer: We have specified at Paragraph 5.17 of Specific Requirement 1 how repatriated
          funds should be accounted for where they relate to a reimbursable APP scam payment.
          Our policy does not affect how PSPs should account for any out-of-scope APP scam
          payments that are successfully repatriated.

          We encourage PSPs to consider any obligations that may arise under the FCA’s Consumer
          Duty when making determinations as to how to account for repatriated funds that are not
          covered by our reimbursement requirement.

          Question 6: If the sender or recipient of an APP scam payment
          are located outside of the UK, are they out of scope of the
          reimbursement requirement?
          Answer: Our policy does not require that the sender or recipient of funds be physically
          domiciled in the UK to fall within its scope. The test is whether the payment:

            • is executed through the Faster Payments scheme
            • is authorised by the PSP’s consumer
            • is executed by that PSP in the UK
            • is received in a relevant account in the UK that is not controlled by the consumer

          What matters is whether the payment is both executed in the UK and received into a
          relevant account in the UK.

          Question 7: I am a PSP and provide virtual or ‘borderless’
          accounts to non-UK consumers, are these ‘relevant accounts’?
          Answer: Specific Requirement 1 stipulates that a relevant account means an account that:

            • is provided to a service user
            • is held in the UK
            • can send or receive payments using the Faster Payments Scheme

          This does not include accounts provided by credit unions, municipal banks and national
          savings banks.

          Whether a virtual or ‘borderless’ account is a ‘relevant account’ turns on whether it meets
          these criteria.




Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                   23
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                 PS25/5




          Question 8: I am a PSP - how do I know whether I am providing a
          relevant account or not?
          Answer: Our Specific Direction 20 is the definitive statement of our position and nothing in
          this guidance alters in any way the contents of these or any other legal instruments we
          have issued. Individual PSPs are responsible for determining the scope of any obligations
          they may have under our legal instruments.

          A ‘Relevant Account’ is defined in Specific Direction 20 as follows:

          ‘[A]n account that is provided to a service user, is held in the UK and can send or receive
          payments using the Faster Payments Scheme, but excludes accounts provided by credit
          unions, municipal banks and national savings banks.’

          Accordingly, a ‘Relevant Account’ must exhibit all the following features:

            1. It is provided by a Payment Service Provider to a Service User, noting that a Service
               User cannot also be a Payment Service Provider (or vice versa) in the same payment
               system.
            2. It is ‘held in the UK’. This means that a unique identifier (which may, for example,
               consist of a sort code and account number) addressable by the payment system, and
               any secondary reference data (where applicable), is issued by a Payment Service
               Provider in the UK and must correspond to an identifiable Service User.
            3. It holds a balance, whether credit, debit or zero, and it can send and/or receive
               transactions using the FPS, the execution of which increases or decreases the
               balance.
            4. It can send or receive payment transactions executed across the FPS which exhibit
               one or more of the following features:
                 • for transactions sent from the account
                     o they are authorised by a Service User directly
                     o they are authorised by the Service User indirectly through an agent
                     o they are agreed in advance between a Payment Service Provider and a Service
                       User (such as standing orders and standing instructions, covered by the
                       agreement of the account operating definitions)
                     o they fulfil an obligation contained in the rules of a payment system (such as
                       payment of received transaction balance to a merchant by an acquirer)
                     o they are validly authorised in another manner.
                 • for transactions received by the account:
                     o any funds received are at the disposal of the Service User to whom the
                       account is being provided;
                     o any e-money received is available for redemption by the Service User to whom
                       the account is being provided.

                An account which meets these criteria will constitute a ‘Relevant Account’ irrespective
                of whether the account is used to facilitate an international payment transfer.




Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                    24
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                              PS25/5




                For example:

                 • A ‘Relevant Account’ can be a current account at a credit institution which can
                   send and/or receive Faster Payments.
                 • A ‘Relevant Account’ can be a savings account at a UK Building Society which can
                   send and/or receive Faster Payments.
                 • A ‘Relevant Account’ can be a credit card account issued in the UK which can
                   send and/or receive Faster Payments.
                 • A ‘Relevant Account’ can be an account at a UK Electronic Money Institution.
                 • A ‘Relevant Account’ cannot be an account provided to a Payment Service
                   Provider, such as a money remittance firm, by an indirect access provider.
                 • A ‘Relevant Account’ cannot be an account provided by a credit union, a municipal
                   bank, or a national savings bank.
                 • A ‘Relevant Account’ cannot be a specific account whose sort code and account
                   number details are provided by a PSP to its customer solely for the payment of
                   fees and/or charges.
                 • A ‘Relevant Account’ may be a Head Office Collection Account provided to a
                   Service User (noting that Head Office Collection Accounts provided to PSPs are
                   not ‘Relevant Accounts’).

          Question 9: I am a PSP based in the UK Channel Islands/the Isle
          of Man, am I within scope of the reimbursement requirement?
          Answer: The term ‘UK’ within our legal instruments is limited to Great Britain and
          Northern Ireland and does not include the Channel Islands. An account which is held in the
          Channel Islands is thus not ‘held in the UK’ for the purposes of our legal instruments.

          Question 10: I am a PSP based in Gibraltar, am I within scope of
          the reimbursement requirement?
          Answer: Although the term ‘UK’ within our legal instruments does not include Gibraltar,
          we are aware that some Gibraltarian PSPs have passporting rights to operate within the UK.
          The test will thus be whether any accounts provided by those PSPs are ‘held in the UK’.

          Question 11: I am a consumer and my PSP has rejected my
          reimbursement claim, can the PSR help?
          Answer: We do not have an adjudicatory function and cannot consider individual
          complaints from consumers. You may wish to raise a complaint with the Financial
          Ombudsman Service. Its website is: www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk




Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                 25
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                    PS25/5




          Question 12: I am a PSP and I have rejected an APP scam claim
          from a consumer, can I reconsider the same case if the consumer
          presents new information in the future?
          Answer: Although our legal instruments do not prohibit a sending PSP from choosing to
          voluntarily re-consider a claim it has previously rejected, Specific Requirement 1 makes
          clear that any receiving PSP(s) shall not be liable to pay any amount to a sending PSP in
          relation any payment made by the sending PSP to a consumer after the sending PSP has
          closed a claim (including by rejecting it). This includes any payment made as a result of a
          court or alternative dispute resolution decision after the claim is closed.

          This means that, if a sending PSP chose to re-open a claim it had previously closed, it would
          do so voluntarily, it would not fall within our policy, and it would not be entitled to claim any
          contribution from the receiving PSP(s) towards the costs of any reimbursements.

          Question 13: I am a PSP and provide money remittance products
          to non-UK receiving accounts, are these within scope of the
          reimbursement requirement?
          Answer: The operating model of money remittance products varies widely between PSPs
          and thus it is not possible for us to give a blanket answer. If a PSP provides relevant
          accounts to a service user, it is potentially within scope of the reimbursement requirement.

          Question 14: If a consumer delegates control over their payment
          account to a fraudster, are any payment orders executed by the
          fraudster within scope of the reimbursement requirement?
          Answer: Our legal instruments require that any payment orders must have been
          authorised by the consumer that seeks to raise a claim for reimbursement. If those
          payment orders were executed by the fraudster exercising control over a payment
          account, they are not within scope of the reimbursement requirement. They may,
          however, separately qualify as unauthorised payments under the Payment Services
          Regulations 2017, depending on the circumstances.

          Question 15: I am a consumer and lost money to a scam in which I
          transferred money overseas, am I eligible for reimbursement?
          Answer: Our policy only provides protection for payments sent across the Faster
          Payments System where both the sending and receiving accounts are held in the UK. If a
          payment does not meet these criteria, it is not within scope, although note that some
          virtual or borderless accounts may be within scope of our policy notwithstanding that one
          party is outside of the UK.




Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                      26
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                                  PS25/5




          Question 16: If an accountant or lawyer executed a payment
          order on behalf of a consumer, and the payment turns out to be
          an APP scam, is that payment still within scope of the
          reimbursement requirement?
          Answer: If the consumer personally authorised the payment order, then such payments
          are potentially within scope of the reimbursement requirement, provided the other legal
          criteria are satisfied.

          Question 17: Can a firm be both a PSP and a service user in
          relation to the same payment system?
          Answer: No. Specific Direction 20 specifies that the term service user ‘means a person
          who uses a service provided by a payment system and is not a participant in that payment
          system.’ It follows that a person who is a participant in Faster Payments, whether directly
          or indirectly, cannot also be a service user for the purposes of Specific Direction 20.

          Because of the mutually exclusive definition of ‘service user', an entity remains a PSP
          where it is a participant in the Faster Payments even where it is also a person who uses
          a service provided by that payment system.

          Question 18: Where a money remittance firm provides its
          consumers with a payment service which does not include an
          account that holds a balance, does the entity provide a ‘relevant
          account’ according to definitions in Specific Direction 20 and the
          Faster Payments reimbursement rules?
          Answer: A precondition in Specific Direction 20 for the provision of a relevant account is
          that it is an account ‘provided to a service user’. This includes, but is not limited to, the
          existence of a unique identifier which corresponds both to a particular consumer and a
          particular balance held for that consumer. There must be, at least, a unique record, for
          each consumer, of funds passing in, out, and through an account provided by a PSP. If this
          is not present, there is no ‘relevant account’ within the meaning of Specific Direction 20.

          Question 19: Are money remittance firms considered to be a ‘PSP’
          or a ‘service user’ according to the definitions used in the Faster
          Payments reimbursement rules and Specific Direction 20?
          Answer: The definition of ‘PSP’ in Specific Direction 20 is the same as the definition in
          s.42(5) of the Financial Services (Banking Reform) Act 2013. Thus, ‘any person who provides
          services to persons who are not participants in the system for the purposes of enabling the
          transfer of funds using the payment system’ is a Payment Service Provider (PSP).

          It is not possible within the meaning of Specific Direction 20 or the Faster Payments
          reimbursement rules for a PSP to also to be a service user in relation to the same payment
          system, or vice versa. The definitional terms are mutually exclusive.

          It is possible to be a PSP that does not provide ‘relevant accounts’ to be a service user.
          Further, it is possible for a single PSP to offer some services which do involve the provision
          of a ‘relevant account’, and others which do not involve the provision of a ‘relevant account’.



Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                    27
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                             PS25/5




          Question 20: What about if the ultimate recipient of a payment is
          outside of the UK?
          Answer: If a payment was sent over Faster Payments by a consumer in the UK to a virtual
          account that includes a UK sort code and account number, which is held in the name of
          the receiver of the payment, then this constitutes a ‘relevant account’ regardless of where
          the recipient is domiciled.

          Question 21: What if the sender of the funds is outside the UK?
          Answer: If funds are sent over Faster Payments from a virtual account that includes
          a UK sort code and account number, held in the name of the sender of the payment,
          and received in a relevant account, then this brings the payment within scope of our
          reimbursement policy. The sender of the funds, wherever they are domiciled, would still
          need to fall within our definition of a ‘consumer’. The sending PSP would ultimately need
          to determine whether a claim gave rise to one or more reimbursable APP scam payments.

          Question 22: What if the consumer who sends funds is not a
          customer of the receiving PSP?
          Answer: We are aware of a small number of cross-border transactions where a sending
          PSP is providing a relevant account to a consumer but where that consumer is not in fact
          a customer of the sending PSP. The Faster Payment Rules, authored and maintained by
          Pay.UK, specify that, in order to qualify as an FPS APP Scam Payment, a consumer must
          also be a customer of the sending PSP. Where this condition is not satisfied, any such
          payments are presently out of scope.




Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                 28
APP scams reimbursement requirement: consolidated policy statement                            PS25/5




6 Cost benefit analysis
6.1       The purpose of consolidating previous policy statements within this document is to help
          stakeholders more easily understand, navigate and implement our policy requirements.

6.2       We are not amending existing requirements, nor introducing new requirements and so
          consider that our assessment of the likely impacts of our APP scams reimbursement
          requirement remains as summarised in published cost benefit analyses of previous
          documents. Those documents remain available on our website. 50




50    www.psr.org.uk/our-work/app-scams/


Payment Systems Regulator                                   May 2025                                29
PUB REF: PS25/5

© The Payment Systems Regulator Limited 2025
12 Endeavour Square
London E20 1JN
Telephone: 0300 456 3677
Website: www.psr.org.uk

All rights reserved
