Specific Requirement 1 on the
Faster Payments Operator to
insert APP scam reimbursement
rules into the Faster Payments
Scheme rules

Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024)
(FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)


July 2024
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




           Specific Requirement 1
           (July 2024): FPS APP scam
           reimbursement rules
1          Recitals
           Whereas:


1.1        Authorised push payment (APP) scams happen when a person uses a fraudulent or
           dishonest course of conduct to manipulate, deceive or persuade someone into sending
           money to an account outside of their control.


1.2        The Financial Services and Markets Act 2023 (FSMA 2023) places a statutory obligation
           on the Payment Systems Regulator (PSR) to introduce a reimbursement requirement
           for APP scam payments made over the Faster Payments Scheme by the end of
           February 2024.


1.3        The PSR has decided to implement a policy that requires APP scam victims to be
           reimbursed by the sending payment service provider (PSP). This is known as the FPS
           reimbursement requirement.


1.4        The PSR has decided to implement this policy by requiring the Faster Payments
           Operator to put the FPS reimbursement requirement into the Faster Payments Scheme
           rules. The resulting rules will be known as the FPS reimbursement rules.


1.5        The PSR has also decided to direct in-scope participants in the Faster Payments
           Scheme to comply with the FPS reimbursement rules. This is to ensure that these rules
           apply to both members and non-members of the Faster Payments Scheme, so that all
           participants in the Faster Payments Scheme and their consumers are, as far as
           possible, placed on an equal footing.


1.6        The PSR issued the original version of Specific Requirement 1 on 19 December 2023.
           This version of Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) revokes and replaces that version, in
           order to make the amendments set out in PSR Policy Statement CP24/3: The FPS APP
           scams reimbursement requirement: compliance and monitoring. These amendments
           clarify certain aspects of the FPS reimbursement rules, and set out clearly those rules
           the Faster Payments Operator must inform the PSR of changes to in advance.




Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                   2
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




1.7         This Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) is an amended and consolidated version of the
            original Specific Requirement 1. The Schedule of Key Changes to this specific requirement
            sets out the deletions, insertions and amendments to the provisions and definitions. For
            transparency the PSR has also published a comparite alongside this consolidated
            requirement. .



2           Powers exercised and purpose
2.1         The Faster Payments Scheme is designated by the Treasury as a regulated payment
            system under section 43 of Financial Services (Banking Reform) Act 2013 (FSBRA) for
            the purposes of Part 5 of FSBRA.


2.2         The PSR imposes this specific requirement in accordance with section 55(1) of FSBRA.
            In accordance with section 55(2), this requirement applies to a specified person.


2.3         Pay.UK is a payment system operator with responsibility for managing and operating
            the Faster Payments Scheme. This specific requirement refers to the operator of the
            Faster Payments Scheme as the ‘Faster Payments Operator’.


2.4         In making its decision to use its section 55 powers, the PSR had regard to section 62 of
            FSBRA (Duty to consider exercise of powers under the Competition Act 1998).


2.5         Under section 72 of FSMA 2023, the PSR must introduce a reimbursement requirement
            for APP scam payments made over the Faster Payments Scheme. The PSR imposes
            this specific requirement to fulfil this duty. It hereby requires the Faster Payments
            Operator to include a reimbursement requirement for APP scam payments made over
            FPS in the scheme rules.


2.6         The PSR imposes this specific requirement for the reasons and purpose set out in its
            policy statement PS23/3, Fighting authorised push payment fraud: a new
            reimbursement requirement (June 2023) 1:

              • to incentivise the payments industry to invest in fraud prevention, increasing
                consumer protections so most victims of APP scams are swiftly reimbursed

              • to pursue its long-term ambition for the Faster Payments Operator to tackle fraud
                by improving the Faster Payments Scheme rules

2.7         The PSR also gives this amended and consolidated specific requirement for the reasons
            and purpose set out in its policy statement PS24/3, The Faster Payments APP scams
            reimbursement requirement: compliance and monitoring (July 2024).




1     www.psr.org.uk/publications/policy-statements/ps23-3-fighting-authorised-push-payment-fraud-a-new-
      reimbursement-requirement/



Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                           3
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




           Requirements
3          Requirement to change the Faster Payments
           Scheme rules to introduce the reimbursement
           requirement for APP scams
3.1        The PSR requires the Faster Payments Operator to change the Faster Payments
           Scheme rules by 7 June 2024 (except as otherwise provided for in this specific
           requirement) in the ways set out in this specific requirement, to achieve the specified
           purpose of incorporating the reimbursement requirement and additional exceptions
           and provisions into those rules.


3.2        The Faster Payments Operator must implement the rule changes from 7 October 2024.


3.3        The Faster Payments Scheme rules must use, refer to and contain definitions of the
           terms listed below, and the definitions must be taken from the ‘Interpretation’ section
           of this specific requirement, insofar as that wording is appropriate for the Faster
           Payments Scheme rule book:

             a. account controlled by the consumer

             b. agent

             c. authorised push payment (APP)

             d. APP scam

             e. FPS APP scam claim

             f. authorisation

             g. business day

             h. consumer

             i. consumer standard of caution exception

             j. Faster Payments Scheme

             k. FPS APP scam payment

             l. FPS reimbursement requirement

             m. FPS reimbursement rules

             n. indirect access provider




Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                     4
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




             o. member of the Faster Payments Scheme

             p. operator

             q. payment system

             r. Payment Systems Regulator (PSR)

             s. payment service provider (PSP)

             t. receiving PSP

             u. reimbursable FPS APP scam payment

             v. relevant account

             w. repatriation

             x. service user

             y. sending PSP

             z. victim

             aa. vulnerable consumer

3.4        The Faster Payments Scheme rules must contain reimbursement rules (the FPS
           reimbursement rules) that produce the outcomes set out in this specific requirement.


3.5        The FPS reimbursement rules must apply to all members of the Faster Payments
           Scheme that provide relevant accounts.


3.6        This requirement should be read alongside, and interpreted consistently with, any other
           relevant directions or requirements issued under sections 54 or 55 of FSBRA.



4          The FPS reimbursement requirement

           Incorporating the FPS reimbursement requirement into Faster
           Payments Scheme rules

4.1        The Faster Payments Operator must insert and not alter the FPS reimbursement
           requirement and its scope as set out in paragraphs 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 of Specific Direction
           20 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement requirement).




Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                   5
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




           Exceptions to the FPS reimbursement requirement

           The consumer standard of caution exception

4.2        PSPs are not required to reimburse any FPS APP scam payments where the consumer
           standard of caution exception applies. This exception does not apply if the victim was a
           vulnerable consumer when they made a FPS APP scam payment and this had a
           material impact on their ability to protect themselves from the scam.


4.3        The PSR sets the consumer standard of caution exception and publishes it on its website.
           The PSR may amend the consumer standard of caution exception from time to time.


           Maximum level of reimbursement

4.4        PSPs are not required to reimburse APP scam victims above the maximum level
           of reimbursement. The maximum level of reimbursement applies to each FPS APP
           scam claim.


4.5        The PSR sets the maximum level of reimbursement and publishes it on its website.
           The PSR may amend the maximum level of reimbursement from time to time.


4.6        If a sending PSP reimburses its consumer above the maximum level of reimbursement,
           the part of the reimbursement above the maximum level will be a voluntary
           reimbursement as described in paragraph 5.22 of this specific requirement.


           Time limit for claims

4.7        PSPs are not required to reimburse an FPS APP scam claim reported more than
           13 months after the date of the final FPS APP scam payment of the claim.


4.8        If a sending PSP reimburses a claim reported more than 13 months after the final
           payment, this will be a voluntary reimbursement as described in paragraph 5.22 of
           this specific requirement.



5          Additional provisions to the reimbursement
           requirement

           Time limit for reimbursement

5.1        The sending PSP must reimburse any reimbursable FPS APP scam payment to the
           victim within five business days of the victim making an FPS APP scam claim to the
           sending PSP, unless the sending PSP exercises the ‘stop the clock’ provision set out
           in paragraph 5.4 of this specific requirement.




Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                      6
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




5.2        The amount to be reimbursed by the sending PSP to the victim is to be known as the
           ‘required reimbursement amount’. The required reimbursement amount is the full value
           of the FPS APP scam claim up to the maximum level of reimbursement, less any claim
           excess imposed under paragraph 5.20 of this specific requirement.


5.3        An FPS APP scam claim is deemed to be made when the victim tells the sending PSP it
           has happened with details of the FPS APP scam claim, and specifies at least one FPS
           APP scam payment.


5.4        The ‘stop the clock’ provision pauses the five business-day reimbursement timescale
           set out in paragraph 5.1. A PSP can only stop the clock if it has asked for information to
           assess the claim and is waiting for a response in at least one of the following
           circumstances:

             a. to gather information from the victim(s) (or their agent) or the receiving PSP to
                assess whether the claim is a reimbursable FPS APP scam claim

             b. to verify that a claims management company is submitting a legitimate claim – for
                example, validating that the victim has authorised the company to submit a claim

             c. to gather additional information from a victim to assess their vulnerability

             d. in cases where the sending PSP has evidence of fraud on the part of the person
                who made the FPS APP scam claim, to gather additional information from the
                receiving PSP, law enforcement or other relevant parties

             e. for multi-step scams, to gather additional information from the other PSPs involved.

5.5        Where a sending PSP exercises the ‘stop the clock’ provision, the five business-day
           reimbursement timescale is paused at the point when the sending PSP sends its
           request for information. The five-day clock resumes as soon as the sending PSP
           receives a response.


5.6        A receiving PSP that receives a request from a sending PSP to provide information in
           relation to a reported FPS APP scam claim must respond in a timely and accurate manner.


5.7        The sending PSP can stop the clock as many times as necessary. However, it must
           close the claim before the end of the 35th business day following the reporting of the
           FPS APP scam claim by the victim (or their agent) to the sending PSP.


5.8        An FPS APP scam claim may not be closed until it has been assessed by the sending
           PSP as including one or more reimbursable FPS APP scam payments or not including
           any reimbursable APP scam payments and either:

              1. the consumer has been reimbursed for any reimbursable FPS APP scam
                 payments, or

              2. where the assessment has been that the claim did not include any reimbursable
                 FPS APP scam payments, the claim has been rejected.



Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                        7
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




5.9        In either case the consumer must be provided with a written explanation of the reasons
           for the decision before the claim may be closed.


5.10       The Faster Payments Operator must include and implement FPS reimbursement rules
           which achieve the outcomes set out in paragraphs 5.8 and 5.9 by 31 July 2024.


           Allocating reimbursement between sending and receiving PSPs

5.11       When an FPS APP scam claim is reported to the sending PSP, the sending PSP must
           tell the receiving PSP within the notification period of any FPS APP scam payments
           made to it as part of that claim, in order to maximise the opportunity for repatriating
           stolen funds. The notification period is to be set by the Faster Payments Operator and
           included in the FPS reimbursement rules.


5.12       If requested by the sending PSP, the receiving PSP must pay the sending PSP 50% of
           the lower of:

             a. the amount the sending PSP has paid to the victim that is attributable to any
                reimburseable APP scam payments made to that receiving PSP

             b. the required reimbursement amount that is attributable to any reimburseable APP
                scam payments made to that receiving PSP, if different.

5.13       The sending PSP may only claim the amount specified in paragraph 5.12 (the ‘specified
           amount’) from the receiving PSP after the sending PSP has reimbursed the victim.


5.14       The receiving PSP must pay the sending PSP the specified amount within the
           reasonable period of time which is defined by the Faster Payments Operator.


5.15       If the sending PSP chooses not to apply the maximum claim excess value
           (see paragraph 5.20 of this specific requirement), the following provisions apply:

             a. Where there is a single receiving PSP, that receiving PSP may deduct 50% of the
                maximum claim excess amount from the specified amount.

             b. Where there are two or more receiving PSPs, each may deduct from the specified
                amount an amount that is calculated as follows:

                  1. 50% of the maximum claim excess amount

                  2. The figure derived under step 1. shall be split between the receiving PSPs in
                     proportions which equate to the proportionate value of each receiving PSP’s
                     liability for the reimbursable part of the FPS APP scam claim.

5.16       The proportionate value of each receiving PSP’s liability for the reimburseable part of an
           FPS APP scam claim shall be calculated in accordance with the method set out by the
           Faster Payments Operator in the FPS reimbursement rules.




Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                     8
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




5.17       Where a receiving PSP is able to repatriate funds in an FPS APP scam claim and the
           sending PSP has already reimbursed the victim, the repatriated funds should be
           apportioned as follows:

             a. 50% each to the sending and receiving PSPs, subject to the following
                maximum amounts:

                  1. To the sending PSP, the required reimbursement amount, minus the
                     specified amount.

                  2. To the receiving PSP, the specified amount, not including any amount
                     deducted under paragraph 5.15.

             b. Any remainder to the victim.

5.18       Paragraphs 5.12 to 5.17 do not apply to, and the receiving PSP is not liable to pay
           any amount in relation to:

             a. Any voluntary reimbursement (see paragraphs 5.22 and 5.23 of this
                specific requirement).

             b. Any payment the sending PSP makes to its consumer after it has closed a claim,
                whether by reimbursement or rejection. This includes any payment made as a
                result of a court or Alternative Dispute Resolution decision subsequent to the
                closing of the claim.

5.19       The Faster Payments Operator must include and implement FPS reimbursement rules
           which achieve the outcomes set out in paragraphs 5.11 to 5.18 by 31 July 2024.


           Claim excess

5.20       Sending PSPs may apply a single claim excess to each FPS APP scam claim, up to the
           maximum claim excess value set by the PSR and published on its website. Sending
           PSPs may deduct the amount of any permitted excess from the amount they would
           otherwise be required to reimburse to the victim.


5.21       PSPs may not apply a claim excess if the victim was a vulnerable consumer when they
           made a reimbursable FPS APP scam payment, and this had a material impact on their
           ability to protect themselves from the APP scam.


           Voluntary reimbursement

5.22       Any reimbursement or part of a reimbursement made by a sending PSP other than
           as required by paragraphs 4.1 to 4.8, 5.1 to 5.9 and 5.20 to 5.21 above is a ‘voluntary
           reimbursement’.


5.23       A voluntary reimbursement is outside the scope of the FPS reimbursement requirement
           and the FPS reimbursement rules.



Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                     9
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




6          Requirement to change the Faster Payments
           Scheme rules to clarify the status of the FPS
           reimbursement requirement and rules
6.1        The PSR requires the Faster Payments Operator to include and implement Faster
           Payments Scheme rules by 9 September 2024 which achieve the following outcomes:

             a. The FPS reimbursement rules are part of the Faster Payments Scheme rules, and

             b. Reimbursement in accordance with the FPS reimbursement requirement and rules
                is part of the provision of the service of executing in-scope payments over the
                Faster Payments system to consumers by directed PSPs.


7          Notification requirement
7.1        The PSR will be responsible for the core elements of the policy for the foreseeable
           future. The Faster Payments Operator is required to include these elements in the
           Faster Payments Scheme rules but may not make any changes to them.


7.2        These core elements are the FPS reimbursement requirement and its scope, as set out
           in 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 of Specific Direction 20 (July 2024) (FPS APP scams reimbursement
           requirement).


7.3        The PSR requires the Faster Payments Operator to place all other outcomes (those not
           fitting into the core elements above) into the Faster Payments Scheme rules as outlined
           in this specific requirement, and then keep them under review just as with other
           aspects of the Faster Payments Scheme rules.


7.4        The PSR requires the Faster Payments Operator to notify it at least 20 working days in
           advance of any proposed changes to the FPS reimbursement rules, FPS reimbursement
           claim management system rule, or any rules included in the Faster Payments Scheme
           rules as a result of section 6 of this specific requirement. The Faster Payments
           Operator must send a formal notification before adopting the change. The notification
           should contain sufficient analysis for the PSR to understand the nature of the change,
           the reason for it, and its costs and benefits.



8          Application
8.1        This specific requirement applies to the Faster Payments Operator.




Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                 10
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




9          Revocation of original Specific Requirement 1
9.1        The original Specific Requirement 1, which the PSR gave on 19 December 2023, is
           revoked immediately on the coming into force of this specific requirement. It is replaced
           by this Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024), which is a consolidated text including
           original provisions and amendments as set out in the Schedule of Key Changes.



10         Commencement and duration
10.1       This specific requirement, consolidating changes made to the original
           Specific Requirement 1 and set out in the Schedule of Key Changes, comes
           into force on 12 July 2024.


10.2       Those provisions contained in the original Specific Requirement 1 which came
           into force on 19 December 2023 and are not varied or revoked by this consolidated
           Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) continue in force until such time as they are varied
           or revoked.


10.3       This specific requirement shall continue in force until such time as it is varied or revoked
           by the PSR.



11         Citation
11.1       This specific requirement may be cited as Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024)
           (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules).



12         Interpretation
12.1       The headings and titles used in this specific requirement are for convenience and
           have no legal effect.


12.2       The Interpretation Act 1978 applies to this specific requirement as if it were an
           Act of Parliament, except where words and expressions are expressly defined.


12.3       References to any statute or statutory provisions must be construed as references to
           that statute or statutory provision as amended, re-enacted or modified, whether by
           statute or otherwise.


12.4       The following definitions apply in this specific requirement:

             • Account controlled by the consumer means a relevant account that a consumer
               can access and make payments from. It is not sufficient for it to be in the
               consumer’s name.



Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                     11
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




             • Agent of the victim includes any claims management company.

             • Authorised push payment (APP) means a consumer payment initiated by the
               sending PSP in accordance with an authorisation given by its consumer.

             • APP scam (authorised push payment scam) means where a person uses a
               fraudulent or dishonest act or course of conduct to manipulate, deceive or
               persuade a consumer into transferring funds from the consumer’s relevant account
               to a relevant account not controlled by the consumer, where:

                o the recipient is not who the consumer intended to pay, or

                o the payment is not for the purpose the consumer intended

                For the avoidance of doubt, if the consumer is party to the fraud or dishonesty, this
                is not an APP scam for the purpose of the FPS reimbursement requirement or the
                FPS reimbursement rules.

             • Authorisation, for the purpose of this requirement, in the context of a payment
               means that the payer has given their explicit consent to:

                  1. the execution of the payment transaction, or

                  2. the execution of a series of payment transactions of which that payment
                     transaction forms part

             • Business day, for the purposes of this requirement, means any day (period of 24
               hours beginning at midnight) that is not a Saturday or Sunday, or a bank holiday in
               any part of the United Kingdom.

             • Consumer, for the purposes of this requirement, refers to service users of PSPs.
               These are individuals, microenterprises (enterprises that employ fewer than ten
               persons and have either an annual turnover or an annual balance sheet total that
               does not exceed €2 million) or charities (a body whose annual income is less
               than £1 million per year and is a charity as defined by the Charities Act 2011,
               Charities and Trustees Investment (Scotland) Act 2005 or the Charities Act
               (Northern Ireland) 2008).

             • Consumer standard of caution exception is defined by the PSR in its publication:
               The Consumer Standard of Caution Exception.

             • Directed PSP means a PSP participating in the Faster Payments Scheme to
               which Specific Direction 20 (July 2024) (FPS APP scams reimbursement
               requirement) applies.

             • Faster Payments Scheme or FPS means the Faster Payments Scheme, a
               regulated payment system designated by Order from the Treasury on 1 April 2015.

             • Faster Payments Scheme rules means all rules created by the Faster Payments
               Operator which relate to and/or govern the access to and/or participation in the
               Faster Payments Scheme by PSPs (whether members or non-members).



Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                     12
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




             • FPS APP scam claim means one or more FPS APP scam payments made as part
               of an APP scam and made to the victim’s PSP.

             • FPS APP scam payment, for the purposes of this requirement, means an APP,
               authorised by a victim as part of an APP scam, that has all the following features:

                  1. It is executed through the Faster Payments Scheme.

                  2. It is authorised by a PSP’s consumer.

                  3. It is executed by that PSP in the UK.

                  4. The payment is received in a relevant account in the UK that is not controlled
                     by the consumer.

                  5. The payment is not to the recipient the consumer intended, or is not for the
                     purpose the consumer intended.

             • FPS reimbursement claim management system rule means the rule in the
               Faster Payments Scheme rules which requires the use of the RCMS

             • FPS reimbursement requirement means the obligation conferred on directed
               PSPs under paragraph 3.1 of Specific Direction 20 (July 2024) (FPS APP scams
               reimbursement requirement).

             • FPS reimbursement rules means any rules created as a result of this specific
               requirement, imposed on the Faster Payments operator to create and implement
               rules on PSPs reimbursing their consumers when they fall victim to APP scams.

             • Indirect access provider means a PSP with access to the Faster Payments
               Scheme that has an agreement or arrangement with another person for the
               purpose of enabling that other person (the ‘indirect customer PSP’) to provide
               services for the purposes of enabling the transfer of funds using the Faster
               Payments Scheme or to become a PSP in relation to the Faster Payments Scheme.

             • In-scope payment means any payment, authorised by a consumer, that has all the
               following features:

                  1. It is executed through the Faster Payments Scheme.

                  2. It is authorised by a PSP’s consumer.

                  3. It is executed by that PSP in the UK.

                  4. The payment is received in a relevant account in the UK that is not controlled
                     by the consumer.

             • Member of the Faster Payments Scheme means a directly connected settling
               or directly connected non-settling participant.




Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                      13
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




             • Operator has the same meaning as under section 42(3) of FSBRA in relation to
               the Faster Payments Scheme. The term Faster Payments operator is to be
               understood accordingly.

             • Participant has the same meaning as under section 42(2) of FSBRA.

             • Payment system has the same meaning as under section 41(1) of FSBRA.

             • Payment Systems Regulator (PSR) is the body corporate established under
               section 40 of FSBRA.

             • Payment service provider (PSP) has the same meaning as under section 42(5)
               of FSBRA.

             • Reimbursement claims management system (RCMS) means the claims
               management, communication and information reporting IT system which will be
               provided by the Faster Payments operator for FPS participants to use to
               communicate, manage claims and report information for FPS APP scam claims

             • Receiving PSP means a PSP providing a relevant account into which APP scam
               payments are received. Any references to receiving PSP in the singular may also
               be read in the plural where an FPS APP scam claim includes payments to more
               than one receiving PSP.

             • Reimbursable FPS APP scam payment means an FPS APP scam payment where
               the consumer standard of caution exception does not apply, the victim is not party
               to the fraud or claiming fraudulently or dishonestly to have been defrauded and the
               claim was made within the time limit set out in the reimbursement rules.

             • Relevant account means an account that is provided to a service user, is held in
               the UK and can send or receive payments using the Faster Payments Scheme,
               but excludes accounts provided by credit unions, municipal banks and national
               savings banks.

             • Repatriation means where a receiving PSP is able to detect, freeze and return
               funds transferred as part of an FPS APP scam payment.

             • Sending PSP means a PSP that provides a relevant account for a consumer, from
               which the FPS APP scam payment was made.

             • Service user means a person who uses a service provided by a payment system
               and is not a participant in that payment system.

             • Victim means a consumer who has made one or more FPS APP scam payments.




Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                 14
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




             • Vulnerable consumer has the same meaning as when the term is used by the
               FCA in its Guidance for firms on the fair treatment of vulnerable customers 2,
               namely that a vulnerable consumer is someone who, due to their personal
               circumstances, is especially susceptible to harm – particularly when a firm is not
               acting with appropriate levels of care.




           Made on 12 July 2024                            David Geale
                                                           Interim Managing Director
                                                           Payment Systems Regulator




2   www.fca.org.uk/publications/finalised-guidance/guidance-firms-fair-treatment-vulnerable-customers




Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                        15
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




           Schedule of Key Changes
             • Recitals paragraphs 1.6 and 1.7 inserted

             • New paragraph 2.7 inserted

             • Wording inserted into paragraph 3.1: (except as otherwise provided for in this
               specific requirement)

             • Wording deleted from paragraph 5.4: A PSP can stop the clock if it has asked for
               information to assess the claim and is waiting for a response. PSPs can only stop
               the clock for the following reasons:

             • Wording inserted into paragraph 5.4: A PSP can only stop the clock if it has asked
               for information to assess the claim and is waiting for a response in at least one of
               the following circumstances:

             • Paragraph 5.8 deleted: An FPS APP scam claim may be closed either by
               reimbursement of the consumer where appropriate or by rejection of the claim,
               with an explanation of the reasons

             • New paragraph 5.8 inserted: An FPS APP scam claim may not be closed until it has
               been assessed by the sending PSP as including one or more reimbursable FPS APP
               scam payments or not including any reimbursable APP scam payments and either:

                o the consumer has been reimbursed for any reimbursable FPS APP scam
                  payments, or

                o where the assessment has been that the claim did not include any reimbursable
                  FPS APP scam payments, the claim has been rejected.

             • New paragraph 5.9 inserted: In either case the consumer must be provided with a
               written explanation of the reasons for the decision before the claim may be closed.

             • New paragraph 5.10 inserted: The Faster Payments Operator must include and
               implement FPS reimbursement rules which achieve the outcomes set out in
               paragraphs 5.8 and 5.9 by 31 July 2024.

             • Original paragraph 5.9 now paragraph 5.11

             • Paragraph 5.11 amended as follows:

                o It must tell the receiving PSP replaced with the sending PSP must tell the
                  receiving PSP

                o Wording inserted: of any FPS APP scam payments made to it as part of
                  that claim

             • Original paragraph 5.10 now paragraph 5.12




Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                      16
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




             • New wording inserted into paragraph 5.12.a: that is attributable to any
               reimburseable APP scam payments made to that receiving PSP

             • New wording inserted into paragraph 5.12.b: that is attributable to any
               reimburseable APP scam payments made to that receiving PSP

             • Original paragraph 5.11 now paragraph 5.13

             • Original paragraph 5.12 now paragraph 5.14

             • Paragraph 5.14 amended as follows:

                o A reasonable period of time replaced by the reasonable period of time

                o This period is to be defined replaced by which is defined by

             • Original paragraph 5.13 now paragraph 5.15

             • Paragraph 5.15 amended as follows:

                o Wording inserted: following provisions apply

                o Wording deleted: the receiving PSP may deduct 50% of the maximum
                  claim excess amount from the specified amount

                o Paragraph 5.15.a inserted: Where there is a single receiving PSP, that
                  receiving PSP may deduct 50% of the maximum claim excess amount from
                  the specified amount

                o Paragraph 5.15.b inserted: Where there are two or more receiving PSPs, each
                  may deduct from the specified amount an amount that is calculated as follows:

                      − 50% of the maximum claim excess amount

                      − The figure derived under step 1. shall be split between the receiving PSPs
                        in proportions which equate to the proportionate value of each receiving
                        PSP’s liability for the reimbursable part of the FPS APP scam claim.

             • Paragraph 5.16 inserted: The proportionate value of each receiving PSP’s liability
               for the reimburseable part of an FPS APP scam claim shall be calculated in
               accordance with the method set out by the Faster Payments Operator in the
               FPS reimbursement rules.

             • Original paragraph 5.14 now paragraph 5.17

             • Original paragraph 5.15 now paragraph 5.18

             • Paragraph 5.19 inserted: The Faster Payments Operator must include and
               implement FPS reimbursement rules which achieve the outcomes set out
               in paragraphs 5.11 to 5.18 by 31 July 2024.




Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                     17
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




             • Original paragraph 5.16 now paragraph 5.20

             • Original paragraph 5.17 now paragraph 5.21

             • Original paragraph 5.18 now paragraph 5.22

             • Original paragraph 5.19 now paragraph 5.23

             • New Section 6 inserted

             • Original Section 6 now Section 7

             • Paragraph 7.1 (formerly 6.1) deleted

             • Original paragraph 6.2 now paragraph 7.1

             • Original paragraph 6.3 now paragraph 7.2

             • Original paragraph 6.4 now paragraph 7.3

             • Original paragraph 6.5 now paragraph 7.4

             • Paragraph 7.4 amended as follows:

                o Wording inserted: at least 20 working days in advance

                o Potential replaced by proposed

                o Faster Payments Scheme rules replaced by FPS reimbursement rules,
                  FPS reimbursement claim management system rule, or any rules included
                  in the Faster Payments Scheme rules as a result of section 6 of this specific
                  requirement

             • Section 7 now Section 8

             • New Section 9 inserted

             • Section 10 amended as follows:

                o Original paragraph 8.1 (now paragraph 10.1) deleted: This specific requirement
                  comes into force on 19 December 2023

                o New paragraph 10.1 inserted: This specific requirement, consolidating changes
                  made to the original Specific Requirement 1 and set out in the Schedule of Key
                  Changes, comes into force on 12 July 2024.

                o New paragraph 10.2 inserted: Those provisions contained in the original
                  Specific Requirement 1 which came into force on 19 December 2023 and
                  were not varied or revoked by this consolidated Specific Requirement 1
                  (July 2024) continue in force until such time as they are varied or revoked.




Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                   18
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




                o Original paragraph 8.2 now paragraph 10.3

             • Citation amended, now: Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP Scam
               Reimbursement Rules)

             • New definitions inserted:

                o Faster Payments Scheme rules means all rules created by the Faster
                  Payments Operator which relate to and/or govern the access to and/or
                  participation in the Faster Payments Scheme by PSPs (whether members or
                  non-members).

                o FPS reimbursement claim management system rule means the rule in the
                  Faster Payments Scheme rules which requires the use of the RCMS

                o In-scope payment means any payment, authorised by a consumer, that has all
                  the following features:

                      − It is executed through the Faster Payments Scheme.

                      − It is authorised by a PSP’s consumer.

                      − It is executed by that PSP in the UK.

                      − The payment is received in a relevant account in the UK that is not
                        controlled by the consumer.

                o Reimbursement claims management system (RCMS) means the claims
                  management, communication and information reporting IT system which will be
                  provided by the Faster Payments operator for FPS participants to use to
                  communicate, manage claims and report information for FPS APP scam claims

                o Wording inserted into definition of receiving PSP: Any references to receiving
                  PSP in the singular may also be read in the plural where an FPS APP scam claim
                  includes payments to more than one receiving PSP.




Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                              19
Specific Requirement 1 (July 2024) (FPS APP scam reimbursement rules)




Status of requirements
Requirements give rise to binding obligations. Breaching a requirement is a compliance failure
which makes a party liable to regulatory sanction.




Payment Systems Regulator                              July 2024                                 20
© The Payment Systems Regulator Limited 2024
12 Endeavour Square
London E20 1JN
Telephone: 0300 456 3677
Website: www.psr.org.uk

All rights reserved
